TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE - STUDENT HANDOUT CONTENT
=====================================================

INSTRUCTIONS:
1. Copy and paste the ENTIRE content from your TCOLE/BPOC student handout below this line
2. Include ALL modules, sections, definitions, examples, case studies, and any other material
3. Keep the original formatting as much as possible
4. After pasting, save this file and let me know - I'll use this content to create 150+ targeted exam questions

PASTE YOUR STUDENT HANDOUT CONTENT BELOW THIS LINE:
================================================================

Revised 08/24 
Texas Highway Patrol 
Texas Transportation Code 
BPOC Student Manual 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 1 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Student Manual - Page 2 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Introduction 
This manual is intended to supplement the instruction of a Basic Peace Officer Course (BPOC) Texas 
Transportation Code curriculum and should be used only by DPS Certified Transportation Code Instructors.   
The learning objectives for this course are compliant with TCOLE Course #1000736. This manual identifies 
the general themes and broad information contained in each section covered, however it is not meant to 
replace a thorough reading, studying, and understanding of the Transportation Code. 
For more information about the Texas DPS Transportation Code program or certification as a Transportation 
Code Instructor, please contact Sgt. Scott Hewitt (scott.hewitt@dps.texas.gov) or visit the Texas DPS 
Transportation Code Training Program Website – https://txdpstrafficlaw.com 
Learning Objectives 
The BPOC course contains numerous chapters and subject matter.  Chapter 22 of the BPOC curriculum 
covers Traffic Code, Crash Investigation, and Traffic Incident Management.  This course is intended to cover 
the Traffic Code portion of BPOC Chapter 22.  Crash Investigation and Traffic Incident Management learning 
objectives are covered in separate training. 
The following BPOC Chapter 22 learning objectives will be covered in this course: 
22.1 
22.2 
22.3 
22.4 
22.5 
22.6 
22.7 
22.8 
22.9 
22.10 
22.11 
22.12 
22.13 
22.14 
22.15 
22.16 
22.17 
22.18 
22.19 
22.20 
22.21 
Discuss traffic laws contained in the Transportation Code (TC) and their applications. 
Define the following terms in the TC. 
Define the following terms in the TC, as it relates to traffic, traffic areas, and traffic control. 
Define the various miscellaneous terms listed in Chapter 541, TC. 
Define dispose and litter in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
Explain the required obedience and the effect of the TC. 
Identify who may and who may not be licensed to drive in the state of Texas, and the types and 
classes of licenses that exist under Texas statutes and understand the restrictions thereon. 
Discuss traffic signs, signals, and markings. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to Chapter 545, 
Subchapter B, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists, as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter C, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter D, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter F, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter G, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter H, TC. 
Given a driving situation, determine that a violation exists as it applies to Chapter 545, Subchapter I, TC. 
Identify legal requirements of operating emergency vehicles. 
Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to vehicle equipment standards 
and maintenance. 
Recognize the regulations relating to operation in municipalities and certain counties. 
Recognize the regulations relating to pedestrians. 
Discuss the regulations relating to arrest, and charging procedures, notices and promises to appear. 
Examine the Drivers Responsibility Program (DRP) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 3 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
22.22 
Given a driving situation determine if a violation exists as it applies to the operation of motorcycles. 
22.23 
22.24 
22.25 
22.26 
22.27 
22.28 
22.29 
22.30 
Review the regulations related to privileged parking. 
Describe the regulations related to abandoned motor vehicles. 
Discuss the requirement for registration of vehicles. 
Describe the regulations regarding liability insurance for motor vehicles and financial responsibility. 
Given a situation involving warning signs and devices, determine if a violation of law exists. 
Review regulations related to the removal of injurious materials and wrecked or damaged vehicles 
from the highway. 
Discuss the concept of Implied Consent. 
Illustrate a working knowledge of the laws, methods, and techniques relative to crash investigation 
to include when and where the TC applies in crash investigation. 
The following BPOC Chapter 22 learning objectives will be covered in sperate courses (Crash Investigation 
and TIMS): 
22.31 
22.32 
22.33 
22.34 
22.35 
22.36 
22.37 
22.38 
Apply the procedures for responding to and managing the crash scene.  
Describe procedures for interviewing driver, complainant, and witnesses. 
Identify and apply methods of measuring the crash scene and collecting any physical evidence. 
Recognize the Texas Peace Officer Crash Report CR3 
Compile methods of traffic crash management and investigation. 
Control and direct traffic in a safe and legal manner. 
Describe the legal authority to establish effective traffic flow based on situational priorities.  
Review directing/controlling traffic while using appropriate positioning, signals, and equipment.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 4 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
COURSE ORGANIZATION 
Module 1 
1.1 Penal Code 
1.2 TRC Chapter 472 – Miscellaneous Provisions           
1.3 TRC Chapter 502 – Registration of Vehicles      
1.4 TRC Chapter 503 – Dealer’s and Manufacturer’s Vehicle License Plates         
1.5 TRC Chapter 504 – License Plates 
Module 2           
2.1 TRC Chapter 521 – Driver’s Licenses and Certificates       
2.2 TRC Chapter 522 – Commercial Driver’s Licenses    
Module 3            
3.1 TRC Chapter 541 – Definitions                                                                      
3.2 TRC Chapter 542 – General Provisions                                                                 
3.3 TRC Chapter 543 – Arrest and Prosecution of Violators 
3.4 TRC Chapter 544 – Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings 
Module 4 
4.1 TRC Chapter 545 – Operation and Movement of Vehicles 
Module 5 
5.1 TRC Chapter 546 – Operation of Authorized Emergency Vehicles and Certain Other Vehicles 
5.2 TRC Chapter 547 – Vehicle Equipment 
Module 6 
6.1 TRC Chapter 548 – Compulsory Inspection of Vehicles 
6.2 TRC Chapter 550 – Collision and Collision Reports 
6.3 TRC Chapter 551 – Operation of Bicycles and Mopeds, Golf Carts, and Other Low-Powered Vehicles 
6.4 TRC Chapter 551A – Off-Highway Vehicles 
Module 7 
7.1 TRC Chapter 552 – Pedestrians  
7.2 TRC Chapter 552A – Devices Subject to Pedestrian Laws 
7.3 TRC Chapter 600 – Miscellaneous Provisions 
7.4 TRC Chapter 601 – Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act 
7.5 TRC Chapter 621 – General Provisions Relating to Vehicle Size and Weigh and Chapter 622 – 
Special Provisions and Exceptions for Oversize or Overweight Vehicles 
7.6 TRC Chapter 661 – Protective Headgear for Motorcycle Operators and Passengers 
7.7 TRC Chapter 664 – Standards for Electric Bicycles 
7.8 TRC Chapter 681 – Privileged Parking 
7.9 TRC Chapter 683 – Abandoned Motor Vehicles 
7.10 TRC Chapter 708 – Driver Responsibility Program 
7.11 TRC Chapter 724 – Implied Consent 
7.12 HSC Chapter 365 – Litter  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 5 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 1 – TEXAS PENAL CODE – TRC CHAPTER 504 
SECTION 1.1 - TEXAS PENAL CODE 
BPOC Objective 22.2 - Define the following terms in the TC. 
PC 1.07 – Definitions 
(8) Bodily Injury – physical pain, illness, or any impairment of physical condition. 
Why is this Important? This definition is used to enhance offenses in the TRC.  
Example: TRC 545.157 – If a vehicle fails to slow down or move over for a stationary emergency 
vehicle, the offense is a Class C Misdemeanor (fine only offense), however if the offense results 
in bodily injury, it becomes a Class B Misdemeanor (a higher fine and jail time). 
(46) Serious Bodily Injury – bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, 
serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily 
member or organ. 
Why is this Important? This definition is used to enhance offenses throughout the TRC. 
Example: TRC 550.021 – Failed to Stop and Render Aid following a crash is a Second Degree 
Felony if someone suffers serious bodily injury as a result of the crash.  Otherwise, the penalties 
are less severe. 
(26) Individual – means a human being who is alive, including an unborn child at every stage of 
gestation from fertilization until birth. 
Why is this Important?  The inclusion of an unborn child in this definition allows for criminal charges 
related to the death of an “individual” when an unborn baby is killed in a criminal event such as 
Murder, Intoxication Manslaughter, Manslaughter, Criminally Negligent Homicide, etc. 
Example:  Jim is intoxicated when he runs a stop sign and T-bones another vehicle.  A pregnant 
woman is driving the other vehicle.  She survives, however the crash causes the death of her 
unborn baby.  Jim can be prosecuted for Intoxication Manslaughter because the unborn child 
meets the definition of an “individual” and Jim’s intoxication caused the death of that individual. 
(40) Public Place – any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and 
includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment 
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Why is this Important?  Several frequently used offenses must occur in a “public place” before 
enforcement action can be taken – Driving While Intoxicated, DUI – Minor, Reckless Driving.  
Additionally, motor vehicle crashes are considered reportable crashes when they occur in a “public 
place” such as a parking lot. 
(49) Death – includes, for an individual who is an unborn child, the failure to be born alive. 
Why is this Important?  This definition allows for a person to be held accountable via conventional 
charges (Murder, Manslaughter, etc.) when their actions cause an unborn child to not be born alive. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 6 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Objective 22.30 - Illustrate a working knowledge of the laws, methods, and techniques relative 
to crash investigation to include when and where the TC applies in crash investigation. 
PC 19.04 – Manslaughter 
This offense is frequently used in fatal crash investigation.  The actions of the person who caused the 
death must meet the culpable mental state of “recklessly” as defined in PC 6.03. 
Recklessly - when a person is aware of but consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that 
the circumstances exist or the result will occur.  The risk must be of such a nature and degree that its 
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise 
under all the circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint. 
Apply It: 
Jim is traveling 60 MPH in a 60 MPH zone, but the roadway is wet and he encounters a low spot holding 
water.  His vehicle hydroplanes, leaves the roadway, and rolls over several times.  Jim’s passenger is 
killed in the crash. 
Has Jim committed the offense of Manslaughter?  (circle one) 
Yes      
   No          
Discussion:  The answer is most likely “No”.  Although Jim’s actions 
caused a crash that killed his passenger, they were not a “gross 
deviation” from ordinary standards of care and Jim was not aware that 
his driving behavior posed a substantial and unjustifiable risk. 
PC 19.05 – Criminally Negligent Homicide 
This offense is frequently used in fatal crash investigation.  The actions of the person who caused the 
crash/death must meet the culpable mental state of “criminal negligence” as defined in PC 6.03. 
Criminal Negligence - when a person ought to be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the 
circumstances exist or the result will occur.  The risk must be of such a nature and degree that the failure 
to perceive it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that an ordinary person would 
exercise under all the circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint. 
Case Law –  Queeman v. State, Texas Court of Criminal Appeals – good guidance regarding building a 
Criminally Negligent Homicide case based on Class C traffic violations. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 7 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 8 
 
Apply It: 
Jim is traveling 70 MPH in a 60 MPH zone.  Jim is running late for an appointment and he is texting his 
client to reschedule at the time of the crash.  It is raining and Jim’s tires are extremely worn.  The tread 
depth measures 1/32” after the crash.  Jim encounters a low spot holding water.  His vehicle 
hydroplanes, leaves the roadway, and rolls over several times.  Jim’s passenger is killed in the crash. 
 
Has Jim committed the offense of Criminally Negligent Homicide?  
(circle one) 
                                         Yes         No          
 
 
Discussion:  These circumstances would likely rise to the level of 
“criminal negligence”.  Jim is speeding while texting and driving in the 
rain on tires with extremely poor tread.  Jim should have known that 
the combination of these elements posed a substantial and 
unjustifiable risk to his passenger. 
 
 
 
 
Manslaughter vs. Criminally Negligent Homicide 
The difference is the culpable mental state. 
Manslaughter (Recklessly) – aware of the substantial and unjustifiable risk but consciously disregards 
the risk. 
CNH (with Criminal Negligence) – ought to be aware of the substantial and unjustifiable risk. 
 
Word Association:  
 Manslaughter   Reckless  Death  2nd Degree Felony 
 Criminally Negligent Homicide  With Criminal Negligence  Death   State Jail Felony 
 
PC 49.07 – Intoxication Assault 
Before filing this charge, ensure that the following elements are met: 
1) The person was operating a motor vehicle in a public place or the person was operating an 
aircraft, watercraft, or amusement ride (or assembling an amusement ride); 
2) The person was intoxicated; 
3) The intoxication resulted in Serious Bodily Injury as defined in this section. 
This offense is a 3rd degree felony. 
Word Association:  Intoxication Assault   Serious Bodily Injury Caused by Intoxication   3rd Degree 
Felony 
PC 49.08 – Intoxication Manslaughter 
Before filing this charge, ensure that the following elements are met: 
1) The person was operating a motor vehicle in a public place or the person was operating an 
aircraft, watercraft, or amusement ride (or assembling an amusement ride); 
2) The person was intoxicated; 
3) The intoxication resulted in death of another person. 
This offense is a 2nd degree felony. 
Word Association:  Intoxication Manslaughter   Death Caused by Intoxication    2nd Degree Felony 
SECTION 1.2 – CHAPTER 472 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
BPOC Objective 22.27 - Given a situation involving warning signs and devices, determine if a violation 
of law exists. 
472.021 – Tampering with Warning Devices   
It is an offense to tamper with, damage, or remove a barricade, flare pot, sign, flasher signal, or other 
device warning of construction, repair, or detour on or adjacent to a highway. 
Enforcement Notes: 
1)  The device must warn of construction, repair, or detour; and 
2)  The device must have been placed by the state, a political subdivision, a contractor, or a public 
utility. 
DPS Arrest Title:  Tampering with Warning Device 
This offense is punishable by a fine between $25 and $1,000 and up to 2 years in county jail. 
472.022 – Obeying Warning Signs and Barricades 
It is an offense to disregard a warning sign or drive around a barricade. 
“Warning Sign” and “Barricade” are defined in (e)(1) and (e)(3) and these definitions must be 
understood for correct enforcement.  Even a person (flagger) can be considered a warning sign. 
“Barricade” means an obstruction: (A) placed on or across a road, street, or highway of this state by 
the department, a political subdivision of this state, or a contractor or subcontractor constructing or 
repairing the road, street, or highway under authorization of the department or a political 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 9 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
subdivision of this state; and (B) placed to prevent the passage of motor vehicles over the road, 
street, or highway during construction, repair, or dangerous conditions. 
“Warning sign” means a signal, marking, or device placed on a barricade or on a road, street, or 
highway during construction, repair, or dangerous conditions by the department, a political 
subdivision of this state, or a contractor or subcontractor to warn or regulate motor vehicular traffic.  
The term includes a flagger deployed on a road, street, or highway by the department, a political 
subdivision of this state, or a contractor or subcontractor to direct traffic around or on the road, 
street, or highway during construction, repair, or dangerous conditions. 
The fine for this offense can be doubled (to $400) if committed in a construction zone while workers 
are present. 
The offense is enhanced to a Class B Misdemeanor if the barricade has been placed due to water over 
the roadway. 
DPS Arrest titles:  
Disregard Warning Signs/Barricades – Class C Misd. 
Disregard Warning Signs/Barricade-Construction Zone W/Workers – Class C Misd. (double fine) 
Disregard Warning Signs/Barricades Water Over Road – Class B Misd. 
(f)  Deferred adjudication and defensive driving do not apply to an offense under this section. 
Apply It:  
Can a person be cited for Disregard Warning Sign if they travel more 
than 40 MPH in this construction zone?  (circle one) 
Yes       
 No 
Discussion:  This sign is a warning sign as defined in 472.022(e)(3) 
and described in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control 
Devices (sign CW13-1P).  Traveling above 40 MPH constitutes 
disregarding the warning sign. 
If workers are not present, what is the maximum fine?  _________ 
If workers are present, what is the maximum fine?  ___________ 
Note:  A motorist who fails to travel the speed notated on this sign has not committed the violation of 
“Speeding Over Limit” because this is not a regulatory speed limit sign. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 10 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Apply It: 
Can a motorist be cited for Disregard Warning Sign if they 
fail to stop for this flagger?  (circle one) 
Yes        
No 
Discussion:  The motorist has committed the offense of 
Disregard Warning Sign because a flagger meets the 
definition of a warning sign in 472.022.  Do not use 
Disregard Stop Sign if a motorist fails to stop for the flagger.  This sign is described as a “Stop/Slow 
Paddle” in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and it carries a different requirement 
(stop and remain standing until the flagger permits traffic to proceed). 
SECTION 1.3 – CHAPTER 502 - REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.25 -  Discuss the requirement for registration of vehicles. 
502.001 – Definitions (emphasize the underlined words for study) 
(7) Commercial Motor Vehicle – This term is defined numerous times through the TRC, however for 
registration purposes in Chapter 502, a motor vehicle designed or used primarily to transport property. 
(11) Department – for the registration chapter, “department” means the Texas Department of Motor 
Vehicles. 
(15) Farm Semitrailer or Farm Trailer – designed and used primarily as a farm vehicle. 
(16) Farm tractor – has the meaning assigned by 541.201 (a motor vehicle designed and used primarily 
as a farm implement to draw an implement of husbandry, including a plow or a mowing machine.) 
(20) Implement of Husbandry – has the meaning assigned by 541.201 – (A) a vehicle, other than a 
passenger car or truck, that is designed and adapted for use as a farm implement, machinery, or tool for 
tilling the soil; (B)  a towed vehicle that transports to the field and spreads fertilizer or agricultural 
chemicals; or (C)  a motor vehicle designed and adapted to deliver feed to livestock. 
(30) Operate Temporarily on the Highways  – must be going to or coming from a farm and certain other 
places.  
Why is this Important?  This definition is important to understand when considering farm trailer use 
(502.146).  This definition is also utilized in the Texas DMV registration manual – farm tractors and 
implements of husbandry that are operated “temporarily on the highways” are not subject to 
registration. 
(33)  Power Sweeper –  means an implement, with or without motive power, designed for the removal 
by a broom, vacuum, or regenerative air system of debris, dirt, gravel, litter, or sand from asphaltic 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 11 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
concrete or cement concrete surfaces. The term includes a vehicle on which the implement is 
permanently mounted if the vehicle is used only as a power sweeper. 
Why is this Important?  TRC 502.143 states that a power sweeper may not be registered.  A vehicle 
that meets this definition will be operated on highways with no license plate and no registration 
insignia. 
(36) Public Property – property owned or leased by this state or a political subdivision of this state. 
502.005 – Registration of Autocycle   
Autocycles are defined identically in  501.008 and 502.005.  This definition for “autocycle” is used 
throughout the TRC. 
(1)  designed to have when propelled not more than three wheels on the ground; 
(2)  equipped with seatbelts and a steering mechanism; 
(3)  equipped with seating that does not require the operator to straddle or sit astride the seat; and 
(4)  manufactured and certified to comply with federal safety requirements for a motorcycle. 
How to Treat an Autocycle: 
o For driver license purposes, treat autocycles like cars (Reference 521.085). 
o For registration purposes, treat autocycles like motorcycles (only one plate is issued and the 
registration insignia is displayed on the plate).   
o For title purposes, treat autocycles like motorcycles (Reference 501.008). 
o For passenger restrictions, treat autocycles like motorcycles (Reference 545.416(f)). 
o For helmet purposes, treat autocycles like motorcycles unless they are fully or partially enclosed 
(Reference 661.0015). 
o For seatbelt purposes, treat autocycles like motorcycles (Reference 545.412 – autocycle is not 
included in the specific definition of “passenger vehicle” used for seatbelts and child safety 
seats, therefore seatbelts/child safety seats are not required to be used.) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 12 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
502.040 – Registration Required; General Rule   
This is the section under which the vast majority of vehicles are registered in Texas.  Upon purchasing a 
vehicle or becoming a resident of Texas, a person has 30 Days to register a motor vehicle, trailer, or 
semi-trailer.  Everything rolling down the road is required to be registered unless there is a specific 
exception granted in TRC Chapter 502 or the DMV Registration Manual. 
Word Association:  Registration Required  motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer  30 Days 
DPS Arrest Titles: 
Operate Unregistered Trailer or Semitrailer  
Operate Unregistered/Improperly Registered Motor Vehicle 
Useful Cross-references: 
502.471 – the offense for violating a provisions of Chapter 502 
502.472 – the offense for operating an unregistered motor vehicle 
There are numerous exceptions to the registration requirement in Texas.  They will be discussed in more 
detail later in this course and can be found in TRC 502.140-502.146.  A brief list of vehicles that cannot 
be registered in most circumstances or that do not require registration: 
• Off-Highway Vehicles (ATVs, Recreational Off-Highway Vehicles, Utility Vehicles, and Sand Rails) 
• Former Military Vehicles designated for off-highway use 
• Manufactured Housing 
• Power Sweepers 
• Motorized Mobility Devices (electric wheelchairs) 
• Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices (Segway-type vehicles) 
• Vehicles operated to cross a highway separating real property on either side under the control 
of the vehicle owner 
• Vehicles operated by non-residents while visiting Texas (must be registered in the owner’s home 
state) 
• Certain Farm Vehicles, Drilling and Construction Equipment 
502.046 – Evidence of Financial Responsibility 
Evidence of financial responsibility (usually insurance) must be shown in order to register a motor 
vehicle.  This is not required for trailers and semi-trailers.  
502.059 – Issuance of Registration Insignia 
Each vehicle registered is issued a registration insignia.  The registration insignia validates the license 
plates for a specific registration period.   
This insignia must be displayed in the lower left corner of the windshield.  If a vehicle does not have a 
windshield, an insignia will be attached to the license plate.  Displaying a registration insignia in the 
wrong location is a violation.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 13 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Motorcycles, trailers, and vehicles bearing a machinery license plate are required to display a 
registration insignia on the rear license plate. 
DPS Arrest Title:  Improperly Displayed Registration Insignia 
Additional details regarding insignia display can be found in Texas Administrative Code Title 43, Part 10, 
Rule 217.27. 
Apply It: 
You see this vehicle driving down the road.  The 
registration insignia is current, but displayed on the right 
side of the windshield. 
Is this a violation?                 
If yes, what is the violation?   
  Yes       
   No 
____________________________________________ 
502.094 – 72 or 144 Hour Permits  
72 and 144 hour Permits are issued for temporary commercial 
motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or motor bus operation.  There 
are no specific rules for how to display a 72 or 144 hour permit in the 
TRC or Administrative Code. 
(a)(3) The vehicle must be covered by financial responsibility (insurance) prior to receiving a 72 or 144 
Hour permit.   
(e) The vehicle must receive a state inspection prior to operating on a highway.  Operating an 
uninspected vehicle under a 72 or 144 hour permit constitutes a violation (DPS Arrest Title Operate 
Vehicle Without Required Inspection). 
(f)  If a vehicle has been apprehended for violating a registration law of this state, it is no longer eligible 
for a 72 or 144 hour permit.  Reference Administrative Code Title 37, Part 1, Rule 4.33: For the purpose 
of enforcing all provisions of TRC Chapter 502, a vehicle is considered to be apprehended when a 
citation has been issued for a registration violation. 
(g) As soon as the permit expires, the vehicle is considered to be unregistered (i.e. there is no grace 
period). 
The registration receipt is required to be carried when operating under a permit in lieu of registration, 
per DMV Administrative Code Title 43, Part 10, Rule 217.40. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 14 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
502.095 – One-Trip or 30 Day Trip Permits 
These permits are issued to allow operation of 
motor vehicles that are otherwise 
unregistered.  A vehicle operated beyond the 
scope of one of these permits is considered to 
be unregistered. 
(c) One-Trip Permit 
• Good for only one trip from point to point.  DMV Administrative Code Rule 217.40 states that 
the trip must either begin or end in Texas.  
• May not be valid for more than 15 days.   
• Used to transport the vehicle only and may not be used to transport passengers or property.  
• Violation of these provisions means the vehicle is no longer covered by the permit and it should 
be considered to be unregistered.   
• Cost of the One-Trip Permit is $5. 
• A one trip permit does not require a vehicle inspection (reference 548.052). 
(d) 30 Day Permit 
• Can only be issued to vehicles with a gross weight or not more than 10,000 pounds unless the 
vehicle is operated unladen (vehicles with a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds cannot be 
operated on a 30 Day Permit while carrying a load – they would need to obtain a 72 or 144-hour 
permit).   
• Violation of these provisions means the vehicle is no longer covered by the permit and it should 
be considered to be unregistered.   
• Vehicles operated under a 30 Day Permit are required to be inspected.  Failure to be inspected 
constitutes an offense (Operate Vehicle Without Required Inspection). 
• Cost of the permit is $25. 
(e)(3) Proof of financial responsibility is required for One-Trip and 30-Day Permits.   
(f) The registration receipt shall be carried in the vehicle at all times during operation on a One-Trip or 
30-Day permit (reference 502.474). 
Display – One-Trip and 30-Day permits are required to be displayed in the rear window of the vehicle so 
that the tag is clearly visible and legible, however if the vehicle does not have a rear window the permit 
must simply be carried somewhere in the vehicle. 
DPS Arrest Titles: 
Improperly Displayed One Trip or 30 Day Permit 
Fail to Display Registration Receipt One Trip or 30 Day Permit 
Word Association:  One Trip Permit   Point A to Point B   Vehicle Only, No Passengers or Property  
No Inspection Required  $5 
30 Day Permit   No more than 10,000 Pounds unless unladen  Inspection Required  $25 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 15 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
VEHICLES NOT ISSUED REGISTRATION 
Although registration is generally required for vehicles to operate on Texas highways, the TRC provides a 
number of specific exceptions.  The Texas Department of Motor Vehicles should not issue registration 
for the vehicles described in the following sections.  Some of these vehicles may still be legally operated 
on the highway under permits or other circumstances, or they may be issued distinguishing license 
plates that identify the vehicle but don’t constitute full registration. 
502.140 – Certain Off-Highway Vehicles 
Off-highway vehicle is defined in TRC 551A.001 – this term includes all-terrain vehicles, recreational off
highway vehicles, sand rails, and utility vehicles. 
An individual cannot register an off-highway vehicle for operation on a public highway.  
The state, county, or a municipality can register an off-highway vehicle for use on a public highway.  The 
vehicle will be issued a normal license plate and registration insignia in these circumstances. 
Does this mean an individual is never allowed to operate an off-highway vehicle on public highways? 
No.  Although an individual is not permitted to register an off-highway vehicle, there are certain 
circumstances where they would be permitted to operate the vehicle on public highways.  These 
circumstances are described in TRC Chapter 551A and will be discussed in detail 
later.  In these circumstances, the off-highway vehicle may have a distinguishing 
license plate identifying it as an off-highway vehicle, but this does not constitute 
“registration”.  The license plate is for identification purposes only.  
502.142 – Manufactured Housing 
Manufactured housing is not issued registration.  If it is moving down the highway, it 
should be moving under a special permit, not 502.040 registration.  The permit will 
not be displayed on the manufacuted house.  It will be carried by the operator. 
502.143 – Other Vehicles 
These vehicles may be encountered operating on public highways, however registration is not issued for 
them, therefore they are not required to display a license plate, permit, or registration insignia: 
• Power Sweepers 
• Motorized Mobility Devices (electric wheelchairs)  
• Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Devices (Segways) 
• Electric Bicycles 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 16 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 17 
502.144 – Vehicles Operated on Public Highway Separating Real Property Under Vehicle Owner's 
Control 
 
This section allows a property owner to cross the road in an unregistered vehicle if said person owns 
property on both sides of the road. 
 
Apply It: 
 
You stop this vehicle because it is 
not displaying license plates or 
registration.  You talk to Joe and find 
out he’s driving from his property on 
one side of the road to the other. 
Is Joe committing a violation for 
operating an unregistered motor 
vehicle on a public highway? 
                 Yes        No 
 
 
You stop this vehicle because it is 
not displaying license plates or 
registration.  You talk to Joe and find 
out he’s just crossing the road from 
his property to his favorite gas 
station. 
Is Joe committing a violation for 
operating an unregistered motor 
vehicle on a public highway? 
                 Yes        No 
 
 
502.145 – Vehicles Operated by Certain Non-Residents  
 
This section provides for reciprocity and allows nonresident visitors to Texas from other states to 
operate vehicles in Texas under their home state registration.  Home state registration must be current 
and valid.   
 
Once a person becomes a resident of Texas reciprocity ends after 30 days and the person’s vehicles are 
subject to Texas registration (502.040). 
502.146 – Certain Farm Vehicles and Drilling and Construction Equipment 
Vehicles described in this section may be issued distinguishing license plates to identify what they are, 
however this does not constitute full registration, therefore the vehicles will be limited to specific types 
of operation. 
Farm Trailers 
The license plate or registration requirements for farm trailers is dependent on the trailer’s gross weight 
and how the trailer is being used.   
Farm trailers are not required to be registered when used “temporarily on the highway” (502.001(30)) 
to transport agricultural products or supplies to or from the farm or for the purposes of participating in 
equine activity as long as the trailer’s gross weight is not more than 34,000 pounds.   
Farm trailers are not required to receive a state inspection regardless of weight. 
Farm Trailers with a gross weight of 4,000 pounds or less – no license plate or registration required. 
Farm Trailers with a gross weight of more than 4,000 pounds but not more than 34,000 pounds – a 
Farm Trailer license plate is required, but full registration is not required. 
Trailers with a gross weight of more than 34,000 pounds – no longer eligible for Farm Trailer license 
plates and must have normal trailer registration. 
Source:  Texas DMV Registration Manual 
Discussion Point: A trailer used for equine activity or attending livestock shows as defined in the Texas 
Civil Practice and Remedy Code (87.001) may be registered as a farm trailer.  This definition is wide 
ranging and includes rodeo participation even when the participant receives compensation for 
participation. 
Texas DMV Manual Clarification – Trailers with living quarters still qualify for farm trailer license plates 
if the trailer is used within the normal parameters of a farm trailer (agricultural use or equine activity). 
DPS Arrest Title:  Farm Trailer License Violation 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 18 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle towing a trailer displaying a farm trailer license plate.  Circle the 
letter for each circumstance where you could take enforcement action for a Farm 
Trailer License Violation: 
A. The trailer is loaded with corn on the way to the processing plant 
B. The trailer is loaded with rodeo gear and the driver is a professional rodeo cowboy 
C. The trailer is loaded with furniture because the farmer is moving to a new house 
D. The trailer is loaded with yard equipment because the farmer mows yards as a side job 
E. The trailer is loaded with lumber for building a new barn on the farm 
You stop a vehicle towing a small trailer with no license plates or registration.  The driver tells you he is a 
farmer and he is hauling some farm equipment to the farm.  The trailer has a gross weight of 3,800 
pounds.  Is the driver committing a violation for the unregistered trailer with no license plate?     
Yes                     
No 
Additional vehicles described in 502.146 (not subject to registration): 
(b)(2) and (b)(3) Water well and oil well drilling equipment 
Not required to receive full registration.  Only a “Machinery” distinguishing license plate is required. 
Water well workover rig                                                                                       
Only Machinery LP Required 
(b)(4) Construction Machinery 
Not required to receive full registration.  Only a “Machinery” 
distinguishing license plate is required.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 19 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(c)(1) Farm Trailer owned by a cotton gin  
Not required to receive registration if used exclusively to transport agricultural products without charge. 
(c)(2) Fertilizer Trailer 
Not required to be registered if used exclusively to transport fertilizer without charge. 
(c)(3) Cottonseed Trailer 
Not required to be registered if used exclusively to transport cottonseed without charge. 
(d) Farm trailers are exempt from state inspection requirements in Chapter 548. 
(e)  Farm trailers used for hire are not covered by this section and would require normal registration.  If 
any vehicle covered by this section is found to be operating outside the parameters described in this 
section, the vehicle is considered to be unregistered and enforcement action can be taken. 
(f) Enforcement:  If any vehicle covered by this section is found to be operating outside the parameters 
described in this section, the vehicle is considered to be unregistered and enforcement action can be 
taken for Operate Unregistered Motor Vehicle, Trailer, or Semitrailer. 
(h) In order to obtain a farm trailer license plate, the owner must show proof of farm ownership by way 
of a distinguishing number issued by the comptroller. 
502.407 – Operation of Vehicle with Expired License Plate 
This offense does not take place until AFTER the 5th business day after the registration insignia expires.   
There is no reasonable suspicion or probable cause for a stop (even to write a warning) if it is not AFTER  
the 5th business day.  
This section ties the license plate and the registration insignia together.  When the insignia is expired, 
the offense is for displaying a license plate that is no longer validated by a current insignia – i.e. the 
license plate is expired. 
DPS Arrest Title:  Operation of Vehicle with Expired License Plate  
Word Association:  Expired License Plate/Registration  After 5th Business Day 
Apply It: 
You see a vehicle bearing a registration insignia expiring 5/21 (Monday, May 31, 2021). What is the first 
day enforcement action can be taken? 
_________________________________  
Can you stop a vehicle before that date if you just issue a warning? 
YES                         
Reg. Expires 
 NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 20 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Discussion Point:  the language in this section refers to having a license plate for the preceding period.  
This implies that this offense can only be committed for one year after the expiration date, as most 
registration periods last for one year.  Beyond that year, enforcement should be taken under 502.472 
for operating an unregistered vehicle. 
502.433 – Fee: Commercial Farm Motor Vehicles  
Farm Truck plates can be issued for any vehicle that meets the 
definition of “commercial motor vehicle” in Chapter 502 (a 
vehicle designed or used primarily to transport property).  The 
DMV Registration Manual states farm plates may not be issued 
to a passenger vehicle.  The cost for farm truck registration is 50% of the regular registration fee. 
Farm Truck plates can be used for a variety of things that constitute necessities for the home/family, 
including: 
(1) to attend church or school;  
(2) to visit a doctor for medical treatment or supplies; 
(3) for other necessities of the home or family; or 
(4) for the purpose of participating in equine activities or attending livestock shows. 
The primary restriction is that Farm Truck license plates cannot be used for gainful employment outside of 
farming or ranching.  Notice “Farm Truck” license plates are less restrictive than “Farm Trailer” license plates. 
502.478 – CMV Use for Agricultural Purposes (Farm Truck Plate) 
This is the violation/enforcement mechanism when a farm truck license plate is being used improperly 
(usually for gainful employment). 
DPS Arrest Title:  Farm Truck License Violation 
Word Association:  Farm Truck  No Gainful Employment Outside Farming/Ranching/Equine Activity 
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle displaying farm truck license plates.  Circle the letter for each circumstance where 
you could take enforcement action for a Farm Truck License Violation: 
A. The truck is loaded with corn on the way to the processing plant 
B. The truck is loaded with rodeo gear and the driver is a professional cowboy on his way to the rodeo 
C. The truck is unloaded and the operator is on his way to church 
D. The truck is loaded with furniture because the farmer is moving to a new home 
E. The truck is loaded with yard equipment because the farmer mows yards as a side job 
F. The truck is unloaded and the operator is taking his child to the doctor 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 21 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
REGISTRATION OFFENSES AND PENALTIES 
Chapter 502 described numerous registration requirements.  Sections 502.471 – 502.480 describe the 
actual offenses and penalties for violating the provisions of Chapter 502. 
502.471 – General Penalty 
This is a general provision for violating some aspect of Chapter 502 for which there is not a more specific 
penalty – a misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than $200. 
502.472 – Operation of Vehicle Under Improper Registration 
This is a specific offense for operating an unregistered motor vehicle at a time and under circumstances 
that required the vehicle to be registered (described in 502.040). 
This section also creates an offense for a vehicle registered for a class other than that to which the 
vehicle belongs (different classes of vehicles carry different registration fees). 
Note: this section is specific to motor vehicles.  Unregistered trailers and semi-trailers would fall under 
the general violation described in the previous section. 
502.473 – Operation of Vehicle Without Registration Insignia 
This is the offense for a vehicle that is currently registered but fails to display the registration insignia 
on the windshield or license plate as required (reference 502.059(c) – display requirements). 
DPS Arrest Titles:   
Operate Vehicle Without Registration Insignia 
Operate Road Tractor, MC, Trailer, Semitrailer Without Registration Insignia 
502.474 – Operation of One-Trip Permit Without Registration Receipt 
The registration receipt must be carried in the vehicle and displayed upon request when the vehicle is 
operated on a one-trip permit. 
One-Trip Permit temporary tags must be properly displayed in the rear window of a vehicle if the vehicle 
has a rear window (reference 502.095(f)). 
Note:  This section is specific to One-Trip Permits, however keep in mind 30-Day Permits have the same 
display and registration receipt requirements (reference DMV Administrative Code Title 43, Part 10, Rule 
217.40). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 22 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
502.475 – Wrong, Fictitious, Altered or Obscured Insignia   
The offenses described in this section are specific to the registration insignia, not license plates (for 
similar offenses dealing with license plates, see 504.945). 
A person commits an offense if the person attaches to or displays on a motor vehicle a registration 
insignia that: 
(1) is assigned to a different motor vehicle; 
(2) is assigned to the vehicle under any other motor vehicle law other than by the department; 
(3) is assigned for a registration period other than the registration period in effect; or 
(4) is fictitious. 
This offense is a Class C Misdemeanor if the registration insignia is assigned to a different vehicle or 
assigned for a registration period other than the period in effect. 
This offense is a Class B Misdemeanor if the registration insignia is fictitious. 
This section also creates an offense that is a Class B Misdemeanor if the person knowingly made 
illegible the letters, numbers, and other identification marks on the registration insignia. 
Apply It: 
It is September of 2019.  You see this vehicle pass you with a current 
registration insignia and an expired registration insignia.  What enforcement 
action is appropriate? 
A.  No enforcement because the vehicle is displaying a current insignia 
B.  Violation – Operate vehicle with Expired License Plates 
C.  Violation – Display Wrong Registration Insignia 
The operator of this vehicle has used a marker to change the expiration 
dates on the registration insignia.  What level of offense has been 
committed? 
A. Class B Misd. – Fictitious Registration Insignia 
B.  Class C Misd. – Knowingly Altered/Made Illegible Registration Insignia 
C.  Class B Misd. – Knowingly Altered/Made Illegible Registration Insignia 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 23 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
502.4755 – Deceptively Similar Insignia 
A deceptively similar insignia is one that a reasonable person would presume was issued by DMV but it 
was not.   
Possession of a deceptively similar registration insignia is a Class C Misdemeanor, however this is 
enhanced to a Class B Misdemeanor if the violator has previously been convicted of this offense. 
If the person manufactures or sells deceptively similar insignias, the offense is a 3rd Degree Felony. 
For a similar offense involving license plates, see 504.946 (Deceptively Similar License Plate). 
Note: If the insignia is meant to look like a normal registration insignia but bears false information, 
enforcement action for Fictitious Registration Insignia under 502.475 is a more appropriate charge (the 
Fictitious Registration charge is a Class B Misdemeanor).   
502.491 – Transfer of Vehicle Registration   
This section addresses what to do with a registration insignia when a vehicle is sold. 
(a) applies to a vehicle sold by a dealership.  The dealership is required to remove the registration 
insignia and the old registration is considered to be expired at the time of the sale. 
(b) applies to a private sale where neither party holds a dealership distinguishing number.  Registration 
period can continue with the vehicle if the new owner files appropriate paperwork to transfer 
title/registration. 
502.492 – Temporary Transit Permit for a Vehicle Purchased 
If a person purchases a vehicle and the previous owner removes the license plates and registration upon 
sale, the new owner can apply for a temporary transit permit that is valid for 5 days. 
The permit can be purchased online, only one permit may be issued, and the receipt must be carried in 
the vehicle. 
There are no display requirements for the permit. 
Word Association:  Temporary Transit Permit  Purchased Vehicle   5 days  Available Online 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 24 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 1.4 – CHAPTER 503 - DEALER’S AND MANUFACTURER’S VEHICLE LICENSE PLATES 
This section continues BPOC Objective 22.25 - Discuss the requirement for registration of vehicles. 
503.061 – Dealer’s License Plates  
This section refers to a metal dealer license plate.  Per DMV rule 
(215.138) only one plate is issued and display is required in the rear 
license plate area.  The RTS database will return to the dealership, 
not the vehicle.  The dealer may place this plate on a vehicle to be 
used for demonstrations or for personal use.  There are a few 
restrictions: 
Restrictions on metal dealer plates from 503.061: 
• The vehicle must be of a type the dealer is licensed to sell. 
Restrictions on metal dealer plates from 503.068: 
• The vehicle cannot be used as a service vehicle (defined in below referenced admin code). 
• The vehicle cannot be a commercial vehicle carrying a load. 
Restrictions on metal dealer plates from DMV Administrative Code rule 215.138: 
• Shall be attached to the rear license plate holder of a vehicle  
• A copy of the receipt for the metal dealer's license plate issued by the department should be 
carried in the vehicle. 
• Displayed only on the type of vehicle for which the GDN is issued and for which a dealer is 
licensed to sell. 
• Vehicle must have a valid safety inspection. 
Reminder: Vehicles displaying metal dealer license plates may be used for personal use as long as the 
above requirements are met. 
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle displaying this metal dealer license plate for speeding.  
The driver explains he is on a road trip for vacation.  He owns a dealership 
and he pulled the vehicle off his lot and placed the dealer LP on it for his 
road trip.  Is he committing a violation for improperly using the dealer metal 
plate? 
YES                                  
    NO 
You run the vehicle through a database and find that it has not undergone a Texas state Inspection.  Is 
the driver committing a violation for Operate Vehicle Without Required Inspection? 
YES                                  
    NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 25 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
503.062 – Dealer’s Temporary Tags 
There are very limited uses for dealer temporary tags 
(dealer/converter temporary tags and authorized agent 
tags).  They are much more restrictive than metal dealer 
license plates.   
Dealer’s temporary tags may ONLY be used for the following purposes:  
• Vehicle demonstration to prospective buyer. 
• Transit dealer to dealer, to/from an auction, or to/from a repair facility.  
• Road test the vehicle. 
• Vehicle use by a charitable organization. 
• Loaner vehicle to customer while customer’s vehicle is being repaired. 
A state inspection is not required for vehicles displaying dealer temporary tags. 
Dealer temporary tags used for purposes not listed above constitute a violation for Operate Vehicle 
Displaying Unauthorized/Improperly Used Temporary Tag. 
Reference  503.068(a) – Dealer temporary tags may not be used for personal use. 
Display – A dealer’s temporary tag is required to be displayed in the license plate display area located 
at the rear of the vehicle, so that the entire temporary tag is visible and legible at all times, including 
when the vehicle is being operated.  Reference DMV Administrative Code Title 43, Part 10, Rule 
215.151(a) 
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle displaying this dealer temporary tag for speeding.  The 
driver explains that he is on a road trip for vacation.  He owns a dealership 
and he pulled the vehicle off his lot and placed the dealer tag on it for his 
road trip.  Is he committing a violation for an unauthorized/improperly used 
temporary tag? 
YES                                    
  NO 
You run the vehicle through a database and find that it has not undergone a Texas state Inspection.  Is 
the driver committing a violation for Operate Vehicle Without Required Inspection? 
YES                                      
NO 
You stop a vehicle displaying this dealer temporary tag for speeding.  The 
driver explains her vehicle is at the dealership for maintenance and the 
dealership loaned her this vehicle in the meantime.  Is she committing a 
violation for an unauthorized/improperly Used Temporary Tag? 
YES                                   
   NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 26 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
503.0626 – Dealer’s and Converter's Database 
Dealer’s and Converter’s temporary tags are placed in a database.  Law enforcement officers can run the 
tag number and receive a vehicle specific return. 
503.063 – Buyer’s Temporary Tag  
Only one buyer's tag can be issued for a period of time no 
longer than 60 days.  The operator of a vehicle that has been 
issued a second Buyer’s Tag after the first expires is 
committing a violation.  If normal registration is not received 
prior to Buyer’s Tag expiration, other temporary registration 
must be obtained (30 day permit, one trip permit, etc.). 
The dealer is required to properly display the tag upon issuance. 
Display – Buyer’s Temporary Tags are  required to be displayed in the license plate display area located 
at the rear of the vehicle, so that the entire temporary tag is visible and legible at all times, including 
when the vehicle is being operated, per DMV Administrative Code Title 43, Part 10, Rule 215.151(a).   
A buyer’s temp tag that is rolled up so that it is no longer visible and legible due to air movement while 
the vehicle is being operated is improperly displayed and a violation exists (Improperly Displayed 
Dealer/Buyer Temporary Tag).  Flapping in the wind is not specifically prohibited as long as the tag is 
still visible and legible.   
Case Law – Pabst v. State, 466 SW 3d 902 – although the TRC requires the dealer to properly display the 
buyer’s tag, the Court of Appeals states that this requirement also applies to the driver once the vehicle 
leaves the dealership.  
Other requirements for Buyer’s Temporary Tags, Per DMV Administrative Code Title 37, Part 10, Rule 
215.155: 
• May be displayed only on a vehicle that can be legally operated on the public streets and for 
which a sale has been consummated. 
• Valid state inspection is required (must be inspected within 180 days of tag issuance) 
Reference 503.069 – this is the general offense for improperly displayed temporary tags. 
503.0631 – Buyer's Temporary Tag Database  
Buyer’s tags will return a vehicle and owner specific return from the RTS database.  
Word Association:  Buyer’s Temporary Tag  Only One Issued   60 days  State Inspection Required 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 27 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
503.068 – Limitation on Use of Dealer's License Plates and Tags 
This section prescribes additional limitations on dealer license plates and temp tags. 
Dealer Temporary Tags – may not be operated for personal use. 
Metal Dealer License Plate – may not be used on a service or work vehicle and 
may not be used on a commercial vehicle that is carrying a load. 
503.070 – Removal of Out-of-state License Plates 
A dealer who purchases a vehicle that displays an out-of-state license plate must remove the plate 
within a reasonable time and may not operate the vehicle on a public street or highway in this state 
while the vehicle displays an out-of-state license plate. 
503.094 – Criminal Penalty 
This section describes the penalties for the offenses described in 503.067.  The fine for a violation of 
Chapter 503 can range from $50 to $5,000 and it can be tripled if the violation was committed willfully 
or with conscious indifference to the law. 
(a) Produce or reproduce a temporary tag or an item represented to be a temporary tag for the 
purpose of distributing the tag to someone other than a dealer or converter.  State Jail Felony 
(b) Operate a vehicle that displays an unauthorized temporary tag.  Class C Misdemeanor 
(c) A person other than a dealer or converter purchases a temporary tag.  Class C Misdemeanor 
(d) Sell or distribute a temporary tag or an item represented to be a temporary tag unless the person is 
a dealer issuing the tag in connection with the sale of a vehicle or a printer or distributor engaged in the 
business of selling temporary tags solely for uses authorized under this chapter.  Class A Misdemeanor 
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle displaying this buyer’s tag.  The tag number returns to the 
vehicle correctly in the RTS database.  You find out the operator has owned the 
vehicle for several years and it can’t pass inspection.  He tells you he bought the 
tag on Facebook Marketplace for $50 from a guy who owns a car dealership. 
What offense(s) have been committed by the vehicle operator? 
A.  Unauthorized Production or Reproduction of Temporary Tag (SJF) 
B.  Operate Vehicle Displaying Unauthorized/Improperly Used Temporary Tag (MC) 
C.  Unauthorized Purchase of Temporary Tag (MC) 
D.  Unauthorized Sell/Distribution of Temporary Tags (MA) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 28 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Student Manual - Page 29 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 1.5 – CHAPTER 504 - LICENSE PLATES 
This section continues BPOC Objective 22.25 - Discuss the requirement for registration of vehicles. 
504.502 – Certain Exhibition Vehicles  
504.941 – Antique Vehicles; Offense 
Qualifications/Limitations: 
• Vehicle at least 25 years old if a passenger car, truck, 
motorcycle or bus. 
• Vehicle is a collector’s item. 
• Vehicle is used exclusively for exhibitions, club activities, parades, and other functions of 
public interest and is not used for regular transportation. 
• Vehicle does not carry advertising. 
License Plates Must Read:  Antique Auto, Antique Truck, Antique Motorcycle, Antique Bus, or Military 
Vehicle (older issued plates may also read “Antique Vehicle”).   
(h) Only one license plate is required to be displayed (on the rear of the vehicle). 
Reference 601.052 – These vehicles are exempt from insurance requirements. 
Reference 504.941 – it is an offense to use the vehicle beyond the limited scope described in this 
section.  There is a defense to prosecution if the vehicle is being driven to/from a location for 
maintenance purposes. 
DPS Arrest Title – Antique License Plate Violation 
Reference 548.052 – these vehicles do not require an annual inspection. 
Clarification:  The limitations described in this section apply only to a vehicle bearing “Antique” or 
“Military Vehicle” license plates.  These limitations do not apply to vehicles bearing “Classic”, “Custom 
Vehicle”, or “Street Rod” license plates as described in 504.501. 
Apply It: 
You stop a vehicle displaying this license plate.  The driver explains he is 
running to the grocery store for milk.  Is he committing a violation? 
YES                           
  NO 
If so, what is the offense?   ___________________________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 30 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
504.901 – Transfer and Removal of License Plates 
Upon sale or transfer of a motor vehicle, dealerships are required to remove old license plates when 
selling a vehicle. 
For private sales, the previous owner may but is not required to remove the license plates. 
504.943 – Operation of Vehicle Without License Plate 
This section requires license plates to be displayed in a manner that “complies with department rules 
regarding the placement of license plates.”  This means the license plate must be displayed in 
accordance with DMV administrative rules in DMV Administrative Code, Title 43, Part 10, Rule 217.27(b). 
A vehicle issued two license plates must display the plates: 
• In a manner that is clearly visible, readable, and legible 
• One at the exterior front and one at the exterior rear 
• In an upright horizontal position 
• Not less than 12” from the ground measuring from the bottom of the plates 
A vehicle issued one license plate (road tractor, MC, trailer, semitrailer) must display the plate: 
• As close as practical to the exterior rear of the vehicle 
• Not less than 12” from the ground from the bottom of the plate 
Note:  There is no requirement for the plate to be displayed in an upright horizontal position for 
these vehicles. The plate is also not required to be “at” the exterior rear.  Just “as close as 
practical” to the exterior rear.  A trailer or motorcycle with the license plate displayed vertically 
would not be in violation of this section as long as the plate is not less than 12” from the ground. 
DPS Arrest Titles: 
Improperly Placed/Illegible/Unreadable License Plate 
Operate Motor Vehicle without License Plates or with One Plate 
Apply It: 
You see this vehicle pass you on the highway.  Is the operator 
committing a violation?    
YES               
   NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 31 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 32 
 
 
You see this vehicle pass you on the highway with a dirty license 
plate.  Is the operator committing a violation?    
 
                                        YES                  NO 
 
 
 
 
 
You see this vehicle pass you on the highway.  Is the operator 
committing a violation?    
 
                                        YES                  NO 
 
 
 
 
You see this vehicle pass you on the highway with the license plate on 
the dash.  Is the operator committing a violation?    
 
                                        YES                  NO 
 
 
 
 
You see this vehicle pass you on the highway.  It displays a 
Texas registration sticker and a Texas license plate on the 
rear, but no license plate on the front.  Is the operator 
committing a violation?    
 
                                        YES                  NO 
 
 
 
This trailer passes you with a license plate mounted vertically.  Is the operator 
committing a violation? 
 
                                  
                     YES                                NO 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
The bottom of this boat trailer’s license plate is 11” from the roadway 
surface.  Is this a violation? 
YES                            
    NO 
This trailer’s license plate is displayed on the fender rather 
on the rear of the vehicle.  Is this a violation? 
YES                            
504.944 – Operation of Vehicle with Wrong License Plate 
    NO 
It is a violation if the vehicle has a license plate or a registration insignia attached that is issued for a 
different vehicle. 
504.945 – Wrong, Fictitious, Altered, or Obscured License Plate 
Several arrest titles are derived from 504.945. 
Display Wrong License Plate 
The arrest title of Display Wrong License Plate would apply to violations of 504.945(a)(1), (a)(2), and 
(a)(3). 
(a)(1) – a vehicle displays a license plate issued for a different motor vehicle. 
(a)(2) – a vehicle displays a license plate that is issued for the vehicle under any other law other than by 
the department (Texas DMV). 
(a)(3) – a vehicle displays a license plate assigned for a registration period other than the registration 
period in effect (i.e. the vehicle has been issued new license plates for a new registration period but the 
owner failed to change the license plates out). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 33 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Display Fictitious License Plate 
The arrest title of Display Fictitious License Plate would apply to violations of 504.945(a)(4).  This 
offense is a Class B Misdemeanor.   
Obscured License Plate 
The arrest title of Obscured License Plate would apply to violations of 504.945(a)(5).   
(a)(5) – a vehicle displays a license plate that has a blurring or reflective matter that significantly impairs 
the readability of the name of the state in which the vehicle is registered or the letters or numbers of 
the license plate number at any time.   
Note: This arrest title should not be used for a license plate that is unreadable due to dirt or mutilation.  
A better fit for that situation is Improperly Placed/Illegible/Unreadable License Plate under 504.943. 
Unauthorized Illumination Device/Sticker or Emblem on License Plate 
The arrest title of Unauthorized Illumination Device/Sticker or Emblem on License Plate would apply to 
violations of 504.945(a)(6).  
(a)(6) – a vehicle displays a license plate that has an attached illuminated device or sticker, decal, 
emblem, or other insignia that is not authorized by law and that interferes with the readability of the 
letters or numbers of the license plate number or the name of the state in which the vehicle is 
registered. 
Note:  The illuminated device, sticker, decal, emblem, or other insignia is not a violation unless it 
interferes with the readability of the license plate number or state name. 
Display Unauthorized Coating or Covering on License Plate 
The arrest title of Display Unauthorized Coating or Covering on License Plate would apply to violations 
of 504.945(a)(7).  
(a)(7) – a vehicle displays a license plate that has a coating, covering, protective substance, or other 
material that:  
(A) distorts angular visibility or detectability;  
(B) alters or obscures one-half or more of the name of the state in which the vehicle is registered; or 
(C) alters, covers, or obscures the letters or numbers of the license plate number or the color of the plate. 
Numerous courts have held that this section can be applied to a license plate bracket as long as the 
bracket obscures the license plate in the manner described (Martinez v. State, 500 SW 3d 456; 
Czerwinski v. State, Texas Court of Appeals, 13th Dist., 2018). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 34 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
This section would also apply to clear or tinted license plate covers. A change in the language of this 
section during the 88th Legislative Session (HB 2195) makes it an offense to “alter, cover, or obscure” the 
letters or numbers of a license plate. A third or subsequent conviction for violating (a)(7)(C) is a Class B 
Misdemeanor (altering, covering, or obscuring the letters/numbers or color of the license plate). 
Apply It:   
Is this license plate bracket a violation of the law? 
YES                          
  NO 
Is this license plate bracket a violation of the law? 
YES                          
  NO 
Enhancement – Any of the above discussed violations of 504.945 can be enhanced to a Class B 
Misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the person knowingly altered or made 
illegible the letters, numbers, and other identification marks on their license plate. 
Exceptions for Obscured/Obstructed/Illegible License Plates: 
There are numerous exceptions for items that may obstruct the license plate but do not constitute an 
offense under 504.945.  These exceptions are described in 504.945(c).   
There is no violation if license plate is obstructed by: 
1)  a trailer hitch installed on a vehicle in a normal or customary manner. 
2)  a tollway transponder attached to the vehicle in the manner required by the issuing authority. 
3) a wheelchair lift or wheelchair carrier attached to the vehicle in a normal or customary manner. 
4) a trailer being towed by a vehicle. 
5) a bicycle or motorcycle rack that is attached to a vehicle in a normal or customary manner. 
504.946 – Deceptively Similar License Plate  
A deceptively similar license plate is a license plate that was not issued by DMV but a reasonable person 
would presume it was issued by DMV.  These license plates typically bear the correct state and license 
plate number assigned to that vehicle. 
If the vehicle is displaying a license plate that is fraudulent and the registration return comes back with 
no return or registered to a different vehicle, enforcement is better taken for displaying a fictitious 
license plate under 504.945 (Class B Misdemeanor). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 35 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 36 
 
Displaying a Deceptively Similar License Plate is a Class C Misdemeanor. 
 
Displaying a Deceptively Similar License Plate with previous convictions is a Class B Misdemeanor. 
 
Manufacturing or Selling a Deceptively Similar License Plate is a 3rd Degree Felony. 
 
Due to the large number of personalized and specialty license plates, it can be difficult for officers to 
determine whether or not a license plate was issued by DMV or not.  The registration return for the 
vehicle should show the type of license plates issued for a vehicle. 
 
Apply It: 
 
You stop this vehicle.  It is displaying a normal license plate on the rear, but a European style license 
plate on the front: 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rear License Plate (DMV issued)                     Front License Plate (not issued by DMV) 
 
Vehicle Registration Return: 
 
 
Is the operator of this vehicle committing a violation?                      YES                         NO 
 
 
You stop this vehicle.  You have never seen this license plate before. 
 
 
  
Vehicle Registration Return:  
 
Is the operator of this vehicle committing a violation?                      YES                         NO 
 
 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 37 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
504.9465 – License Plate Flipper   
Note this violation must be committed with “criminal negligence”.  This culpable mental state is defined 
in Penal Code 6.03.   
Some vehicles were manufactured with a license plate that flips down to access the gas tank – this is not 
a violation.   
Enforcement action for purchasing or possessing a license plate flipper should only be taken when the 
person is acting with criminal negligence to switch between plates or to hide the license plate. 
Purchasing or possessing a license plate flipper is a Class B Misdemeanor. 
Selling or distributing a license plate flipper is a Class A Misdemeanor. 
MODULE 1 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
Chapter 472 
1. A person who drives around a barricade that has been placed because water is over the roadway 
commits a Class B Misdemeanor.   
a. True 
b. False 
Chapter 502 
2. How many days does a new state resident have to register their vehicles in Texas? 
_______________________________        
3. DMV may register an off-highway vehicle owned by the state, a county, or a municipality, 
however a private individual is not permitted to register an off-highway vehicle.   
a. True 
b. False 
4. A farm trailer with a gross weight of less than 4,000 pounds is not required to display a license 
plate.  
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 38 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
5. A professional rodeo cowboy operating a pick-up and trailer bearing farm license plates on his 
way to the rodeo commits a violation because he is engaged in gainful employment.   
a. True 
b. False  
6. An expired registration certificate does not become a violation of the law until after how long?       
_______________________________       
Chapter 503 
7. Where is a metal dealer license plate required to be displayed?       
_________________________________________        
8. A dealer temporary tag may be used when a vehicle is being road tested by a prospective buyer.  
a. True 
b. False 
9. A dealer temporary tag may be used when a dealer is loaning a vehicle to a person while the 
person’s own vehicle is being repaired.     
a. True 
b. False 
10. A buyer’s temporary tag is valid for a maximum of how many days? 
_________________________________________        
11. A dealership may issue a second buyer’s temporary tag for a vehicle if the first tag expires before 
regular license plates are issued for a vehicle.       
a. True 
b. False 
Chapter 504 
12. Texas license plates may be displayed in the front windshield as long as they are visible and 
readable from the front of the vehicle.      
a. True 
b. False 
13. A trailer may display its license plate vertically as long as it is visible from the rear of the vehicle. 
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 39 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
14. A person may buy license plates from a non-DMV vendor as long as the license plates display the 
correct state name and license plate number.      
a. True 
b. False 
15. A person may display a deceptively similar license plate on the front of their vehicle as long as 
the DMV issued plate is properly displayed on the rear.   
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 40 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 2 – TRC CHAPTERS 521 - 522 
SECTION 2.1 – CHAPTER 521 - DRIVER’S LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES 
BPOC Objective 22.7 - Identify who may and who may not be licensed to drive in the state of Texas, 
and the types and classes of licenses that exist under Texas statutes and understand the restrictions 
thereon. 
521.001 – Definitions  
(3) Driver License – an authorization issued by the department for the operation of a motor vehicle. 
Why is this Important?  A driver license is more than just a physical piece of plastic.  When Chapter 
521 refers to a “driver license” it is referring to a person’s authorization to drive, not just to the 
physical card. 
(4) Gross Combination Weight Rating – uses Chapter 522.003 definition – the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination or articulated vehicle or, if the manufacturer has 
not specified a value, the sum of the gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit and the total weight of 
the towed unit or units and any load on a towed unit. 
Why is this Important?  This is the number used to determine the class of license required to 
operate a combination of vehicles. 
(5) Gross Vehicle Weight Rating – uses Chapter 522.003 definition – the value specified by the 
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
Why is this Important?  This is the number used to determine the class of license required to 
operate a motor vehicle. 
(6) License – an authorization to operate a motor vehicle that is issued under or granted by the laws of 
this state.  The term includes a driver's license, the privilege of a person to operate a motor vehicle 
regardless of whether the person holds a driver's license, and a nonresident's operating privilege. 
Why is this Important?  Again, “license” is not just a piece of plastic.  It is the privilege to drive, even 
if someone does not have a license issued to them.  
(7) Non-resident – a person who is not a resident of this state. 
(b) A word or phrase that is not defined in this chapter but is defined in subtitle C has the meaning in 
this chapter that is assigned by that subtitle.  This allows us to pull definitions from Subtitle C and use 
them for application of this chapter – this includes Chapter 541 (an entire chapter of nothing but 
definitions in Subtitle C). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 41 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
521.021 – License Required 
A person, other than a person exempted, may not operate a motor vehicle on a highway in Texas unless 
they hold a driver’s license. 
The language in this section refers to a “person exempted”.  The list of exempted people can be found in 
521.027.   
Motor Vehicle – a self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from overhead 
trolley wires.  The term does not include an electric bicycle or an electric personal assistive mobility 
device (Segway).  (Reference 541.201) 
Highway – the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any part of which is 
open to the public for vehicular travel.  (Reference 541.302) 
Word Association:  Motor Vehicle on a highway  License Required 
521.027 – Persons Exempt from License Requirement 
These people are exempt from the license requirement in 521.021: 
(1) Military personnel operating military vehicles in the scope of their military service. 
(2) A person operating a road machine, farm tractor, or implement of husbandry that is not a 
commercial motor vehicle. 
Road Machinery – a self-propelled vehicle that was originally and permanently designed as 
machinery, is not designed or used primarily to transport persons or property, and is only 
incidentally operated on a highway.  (Reference 547.001(5-a)) 
Farm Tractor – a motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement to draw an 
implement of husbandry, including a plow or a mowing machine.  (Reference 541.201) 
Implement of Husbandry – (A) a vehicle, other than a passenger car or truck, that is designed and 
adapted for use as a farm implement, machinery, or tool for tilling the soil;  (B)  a towed vehicle that 
transports to the field and spreads fertilizer or agricultural chemicals; or (C)  a motor vehicle 
designed and adapted to deliver feed to livestock.  (Reference 541.201) 
(3) Non-resident active military personnel licensed in another state or Canada.  Note: they must have a 
license in their home state. 
(4) A spouse or dependent of #3 above who is licensed in their home state. 
Apply It:  
You observe the operator of this Segway disregard a stop sign so you conduct a 
traffic stop.  You find that the operator does not have a driver’s license.  Is the 
operator committing a violation for operating a motor vehicle on a highway without 
a driver’s license? 
YES                             
 NO 
Why or why not?   __________________________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 42 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
You are working a crash where this combine collided with 
another vehicle as it was being operated on the highway.  
During your investigation, you determine the combine is being 
operated by an unlicensed 15 year-old.  Is the operator of the 
combine committing a violation for operating a motor vehicle on 
the highway with no driver’s license? 
YES                               
   NO     
521.025 – License to be Carried and Exhibited on Demand; Criminal Penalty 
A person is required to hold the correct class of license for the vehicle being operated and is required to 
display the license upon the demand of a magistrate, court officer, or peace officer.  Failure to display 
the license as required is the offense of Fail to Display Driver License.  Having the wrong class of license 
for the vehicle is the offense of Improper Driver License for Type of Vehicle. 
Subsection (b) states that a peace officer may stop and detain a person operating a motor vehicle to 
determine if the person has a driver’s license.  This describes a suspicion-less stop.  Department policy 
allows suspicion-less stops only in very specific circumstances (checkpoints set up in a prescribed 
manner).  Department personnel SHOULD NOT conduct suspicion-less stops to check for driver’s 
licenses unless participating in an approved checkpoint as described in Chapter 4 of the THP manual. 
Case Law – State v. Luxon – a suspicionless stop as described in this section is still subject to 4th 
Amendment analysis and is only permissible when carried out in a very specific manner (sanctioned 
checkpoint situations that are compliant with Supreme Court reasonableness tests). 
There are enhancements for subsequent convictions committed within one year: 
• 2nd offense increases the fine. 
• 3rd or subsequent offense is a Class B Misdemeanor. 
• There is also an enhancement for having the wrong class of license or failing to display a license 
while operating without financial responsibility and causing a crash resulting in serious bodily 
injury or death.  This offense is a Class A misdemeanor. 
521.026 – Dismissal of Expired Driver License Charge 
A judge MAY dismiss an expired license charge if the license is renewed within 20 working days/before 
the first court appearance. 
There is no statutory requirement to dismiss – this is at the judge’s discretion. 
521.028 – Effect of Military Service on License Requirement 
If military personnel licensed in Texas are absent from this state when their license expires, the license is 
considered to remain valid until they return to this state. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 43 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
521.029 – Operation of Motor Vehicle by New State Residents 
New residents have 90 days to obtain a Texas license as long as they are 16 years of age or older 
and have in the person's possession a driver's license issued by their previous state of residence.  
Word Association: New Resident   Driver License  16 yrs of age or older and 90 days 
Apply It: 
You conduct a traffic stop.  The driver is not able to produce a driver’s license, however he explains he 
just moved to Texas a week ago and he will be getting a Texas driver’s license in the next few weeks.  Is 
the driver committing a violation for operating a motor vehicle with no driver’s license? 
YES     
NO 
521.042 – Collision and Conviction Reports; Individual Records 
This section establishes Texas driving history for crashes and traffic offenses.  This allows for 
accountability when the department is considering renewal of a license. 
(c) Police, fire or EMS involved in on duty crashes will not have the crash reported on their Texas driving
 history if they did not cause the crash or if the crash did not cause more than $1000 in damage.
 521.054 – Notice of Change of Address or Name 
A person who moves to a new address or changes their name must notify the Department to update 
their license within 30 days. 
A person who had an alternate address on their license for security purposes because they were a state 
or federal judge (521.121(c)) must report their correct address within 30 days if they cease to be a 
judge. 
Word Association:  New Name or Address   Driver License  30 days 
521.060 – Emergency Contact & Medical Information Database 
The Department keeps emergency contact on record for emergency situations and also maintains 
information reported on the driver license application regarding conditions that could impair 
communication with law enforcement. 
This information is confidential and may only be disclosed to peace officers for the purposes on making 
death notification or determining if someone has medical conditions that could impair communication. 
The department is required to allow this information to be changed and updated via its website. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 44 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code      
Classification of Driver’s Licenses 
521.081 – Class A License 
521.082 – Class B License 
521.083 – Class C License 
521.084 – Class M License 
The weight used to determine class of license is the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating or Gross Combination 
Weight Rating.  Do not base class of license determination on registered weight or gross weight (actual 
weight).  
The Gross Vehicle Weight Rating is set by the manufacturer and can be found on the vehicle’s VIN 
sticker. 
Enforcement Application: Many larger vehicles require a Commercial Driver’s License to operate, 
however there are numerous exemptions from the Commercial Driver’s License requirement.  These 
exemptions can be found in TRC 522.004 and include recreational vehicles, vehicles operated for 
personal use (not in commerce), emergency vehicles, and certain covered farm vehicles.  While the 
operator of a one of these vehicles is exempt from CDL requirements, if the vehicle is large enough an 
elevated class of license is required. 
Class A is required to drive: 
• A combination of vehicles with a GCWR of 26,001 pounds or more provided the GVWR of the 
vehicle(s) in tow is in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
Word Association:  Class A License   Combination over 26,000  AND Towed Unit over 10,000 
Class B is required to drive: 
• Single vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more. 
• Vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 pounds or more that is towing a vehicle with a GVWR that 
does not exceed 10,000 pounds or a farm trailer with a GVWR that does not exceed 20,000 
pounds. 
• A bus with a seating capacity of 24 passengers or more including the driver. 
Class C authorizes an individual to drive: 
• Single vehicle or combination of vehicles that are not included in Class A or B. 
• Vehicle with a GVWR of less than 26,001 pounds towing a trailer with a GVWR that does not 
exceed 10,000 pounds. 
• Vehicle with a GVWR of less than 26,001 pounds towing a farm trailer with a GVWR that 
does not exceed 20,000 pounds. 
• Vehicle designed to transport 23 or fewer passengers including the driver 
Class M is required to drive a motorcycle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 45 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Flow Charts for Class of License (Farm Trailer and Non-Farm Trailer) 
Is the combination 
GVWR 26,001 lbs. 
or greater? 
Is the trailer(s) GVWR 
greater than 10,000 
lbs.? 
Is the GVWR of the 
power unit 26,001 lbs. 
or greater? 
Is the combination 
GVWR 26,001 lbs. or 
greater? 
Is the trailer(s) GVWR 
greater than 20,000 
lbs.? 
Is the GVWR of the power 
unit 26,001 lbs. or greater? 
Non-CDL Class of 
License Flow 
Chart if the 
Trailer is NOT a 
Farm Trailer 
Non-CDL Class of 
License Flow 
Chart if the 
Trailer is a Farm 
Trailer 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 46 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Class of Driver’s License Rules to Live By 
If you are looking at a Single Unit (not in combination): 
• Class A is NEVER required. 
• GVWR 26,001 lbs. or more – Class B 
• Bus with seating capacity of 24 or more – Class B 
• Everything else – Class C 
If you are looking at a Combination Unit: 
• Start with the trailer. 
o Trailer GVWR 10,000 lbs. or less – pretend the trailer does not exist.  Treat like the 
power unit is operating alone. 
o Farm Trailer GVWR 20,000 lbs. or less – pretend the trailer does not exist.  Treat like the 
power unit is operating alone. 
To require a Class A License, all three must be present: 
• MUST be a combination. 
• Trailer’s GVWR must be more than 10,000 lbs. (20,000 if it is a farm trailer). 
• The combination weight rating must be more than 26,000 lbs. 
Apply It: 
GVWR 10,000 
GVWR 17,000 
GCWR 27,000 
GVWR 18,000 
GVWR 9,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
____________________________ 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
GCWR 27,000 
____________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 47 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GVWR 16,000 GVWR 11,000 
GCWR 27,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
GVWR 28,000 GVWR 10,000 
GCWR 38,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
GVWR 20,000 GVWR 10,001 
GCWR 30,001 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
GVWR 25,000 GVWR 21,000 
GCWR 46,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
GVWR 25,000 GVWR 20,000 
GCWR 45,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
FARM TRAILER 
FARM TRAILER 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
521.085 – Type of Vehicle Authorized 
If a person holds an elevated class of license, they can also drive the vehicles described for the lesser 
classes of licenses EXCEPT motorcycles.  You will always have to have a class M license for most 
motorcycles. 
(b)  An autocycle can be operated without a Class M License. 
The specific type of motorcycle defined in 521.001(a)(6-a) can also be operated without a class M 
license: 
 
An enclosed three-wheeled passenger vehicle with a steering wheel, 
seat belts, a windshield and one or more windshield wipers,  and a 
certified vehicle structure.  For a more detailed definition, see 
521.001(a)(6-a). 
 
GVWR 27,000 GVWR 20,000 
GCWR 47,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
FARM TRAILER 
GVWR 25,000 
BUS 25 PASSENGERS 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
GVWR 28,000 
BUS 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
 
____________________________ 
25 PASSENGERS 
521.101 – Personal Identification Certificate 
Personal Identification Certificate is a Texas ID card.  It looks similar to a driver’s license, however it is 
distinguishable from a license. 
Texas Driver License   
Texas Personal Identification Certificate 
If the person is under 21, the ID card will clearly indicate this status on the face of the card. 
(f-2) Gives non-citizens an avenue to get an ID card as long as they are legally in the US at the time of 
application. 
521.144 – Application by New State Resident 
New residents must show that they’ve already registered their vehicles in Texas prior to obtaining a 
Texas license or sign an affidavit that they do not own a motor vehicle that is required to be registered. 
Remember, a new state resident has 30 days to register vehicles and 90 days to obtain a Texas license. 
521.183 - Surrender of DL or Personal ID Certificate  
If a person holding an ID card requests a driver’s license, they must surrender their ID card to the Department. 
If a person holding a driver’s license requests an ID card, they must surrender their DL to the Department. 
This is Department procedural guidance when issuing cards. It is NOT a violation of Texas law to possess 
both at the same time (i.e. an officer notices both in a person’s wallet while on a traffic stop). 
521.201 – License Ineligibility in General 
This section essentially provides a list of qualifications for obtaining a Texas license and things that will 
disqualify a person from getting a license.   
The department may not issue any license to a person who: 
1) is under 15 years of age 
2) is under 18 years of age unless the person complies with the requirements imposed by Section 
521.204 (driver’s education, currently school enrollment, parental consent). 
3) is shown to be addicted to the use of alcohol, a controlled substance, or another drug that 
renders a person incapable of driving 
4) holds a driver's license that is revoked, canceled, or under suspension 
5) has been determined by a judgment of a court to be totally incapacitated or incapacitated to 
act as the operator of a motor vehicle  
6) the department determines to be afflicted with a mental or physical disability or disease that 
prevents the person from exercising reasonable and ordinary control over a motor vehicle  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 50 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
7) has been reported by a court under Section 521.3452 for failure to appear (offenses committed 
by a minor). 
8) has been reported by a court for failure to appear or default in payment of a fine for a 
misdemeanor that is not covered under Subdivision (7). 
One of the most important parts of this section is the establishment of a minimum age to obtain a Texas 
driver’s license. 
Word Association:  Minimum Age   Texas Driver License  15 YOA 
521.222 – Learner License 
A learner license is also often called an “Instruction Permit”. 
(a)(1) Only issued to a person who is 15, 16, or 17 years of age. 
(a)(2)-(4) To obtain a learner license, the person must: 
• Complete the classroom portion of driver’s education 
• Be enrolled in school or already graduated 
• Have passed a written exam  
(d) This section establishes the requirement for a licensed operator at least 21 years of age to be in the 
front seat monitoring the learner license holder’s driving.  This person must have at least 1 year of 
driving experience. 
(g) The licensed operator in the front seat must be awake and alert.  Under (g) this person commits a 
violation if they sleep, are intoxicated, or are otherwise engaged in activities that prevent proper 
supervision. 
521.223 – Hardship License 
This section establishes the requirements to obtain a Hardship License. 
To qualify for a hardship license, the department must find that one of these three conditions exists: 
1) the failure to issue the license will result in an unusual economic hardship for the family; 
2) the license is necessary because of the illness of a member of the applicant's family;  or 
3) the license is necessary because the applicant is enrolled in a vocational education program and 
requires a driver's license to participate in the program. 
Applicants must be at least 15 years old, must passed driver’s education, and must pass examinations 
described in 521.161.  This is the earliest age a person may obtain a Texas driver’s license. 
521.224 – Restricted Class M License 
This license is only issued to a person 15, 16, or 17 years of age. 
It allows the operation of a motorcycle with a displacement of 250 CCs or less. 
The person must have passed the motorcycle safety course and received parental consent. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 51 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Occupational License 
An occupational license can be issued to a person after their normal driver’s license has been suspended 
or revoked.  The person must meet specific requirements and the occupational license will generally be 
heavily restricted to driving activities necessary for home or work. 
521.241 – Definitions 
(1) Essential need – a need of a person for the operation of a motor vehicle:  
A. in the performance of an occupation or trade or for transportation to and from the place at 
which the person practices the person's occupation or trade;  
B. in the pursuit of an occupation or trade; 
C. for transportation to and from an educational facility in which the person is enrolled;  or  
D. in the performance of essential household duties. 
Why is this Important?  Before getting an occupational license, a person must convince a judge that 
they have an “essential need” to drive. 
(2) Ignition interlock device – a device that uses a deep-lung breath analysis mechanism to make 
impractical the operation of a motor vehicle if ethyl alcohol is detected in the breath of the operator of 
the vehicle. 
Why is this Important?  Many occupational licenses are restricted to operating only a vehicle with an 
ignition interlock device installed. 
521.2421 – Petition 
The petition starts the occupational license process and sets forth the person’s essential need to drive. 
Where is the petition filed? 
If the license is suspended due to DWI or certain other offenses described in Subchapters O or P, the 
petition must be filed with the court in which the person was convicted. 
Otherwise, the petition can be filed with a court where the driver lives or where the offense that 
caused the suspension occurred. 
Once a petition is filed, the judge reviews the petition and decides whether or not the person has an 
essential need to drive.  If the judge finds there is an essential need, he or she issues a court order 
granting the occupational license. 
521.248 – Order Requirements 
The court order granting an occupational license sets forth restrictions on the person’s driving.  
Restrictions can consist of: 
1. Time of day or days of the week a person may drive 
2. The reasons for which a person may drive 
3. Areas or routes permitted 
4. Ignition interlock device requirement, if applicable 
5. Periodic drug or alcohol testing, if applicable 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 52 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
If an ignition interlock device is required, the person should not be subject to other time of day or 
location of travel restrictions. 
(d) The order serves as the occupational license for 45 days once it is granted (521.249).  After 45 days, 
the driver should have completed the rest of the process to obtain the actual occupational license. 
Reference 521.250 – the driver must carry a certified copy of this court order while using the 
occupational license. 
Reference 521.253 – it is a Class B Misdemeanor to violate one of the restrictions listed on the court 
order. 
521.249 – Notice to Department; Issuance of Occupational License 
DPS gets a copy of the court order granting an occupational license from the court.   
Before actually obtaining an occupational license, the person must show proof of Chapter 601 
compliance (proof of financial responsibility, form SR-22).  Once the applicant has provided proof of 
financial responsibility, the Department issues an occupational license. 
Occupational License Summary 
There are multiple steps to obtaining an Occupational License.  They are summarized below: 
1.  Petition – the driver sets forth an essential need to drive. 
2.  Hearing – the judge decides if an essential need exists. 
3.  Court Order – the judge grants occupational license and sets forth restrictions. 
4.  601 compliance – the driver provides proof to DPS that they have insurance (SR-22). 
5.  Occupational License – The department issues an occupational license. 
521.250 – Court Order in Operator's Possession 
A person driving on an Occupational License must have a "certified copy" of the court order in hand and 
shall show it to a peace officer on request.  This is the only way law enforcement can see the specific 
restrictions applied to that driver. 
Failure to have the court order in hand while driving is a Class B Misdemeanor (521.253). 
521.253 – Criminal Penalty 
It is an offense to drive on an Occupational License without the certified court order. 
It is an offense to violate a specific restriction applied to the Occupational License in the court order. 
Either offense is a Class B Misdemeanor and the Occupational License is revoked upon conviction. 
DPS Arrest Titles related to occupational licenses: 
Violate Driver License Restriction on Occupational License 
Fail to Display Court Order – Occupational License  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 53 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 54 
Apply It: 
You conduct a traffic stop and the driver’s normal Texas license is suspended. The driver provides a 
certified court order granting an occupational license and he tells you he has not completed the 
occupational license process yet. The court order was issued 23 days ago. 
Is the driver committing a violation? 
                                                    YES                                          NO 
 
You conduct a traffic stop and the driver’s normal Texas license is suspended. The driver provides a 
certified court order granting an occupational license and he tells you he has not completed the 
occupational license process yet. The court order was issued four months ago. 
Is the driver committing a violation? 
                                                    YES                                          NO 
 
You conduct a traffic stop and the driver’s normal Texas license is suspended. The driver provides an 
occupational license.  You ask to see the court order granting the license and the driver cannot find it.  
He tells you he thinks it is in his other vehicle. 
Is the driver committing a violation? 
                                                    YES                                          NO 
 
You conduct a traffic stop and the driver’s normal Texas license is suspended. The driver provides an 
occupational license. You ask to see the court order granting the license and the driver provides you 
with a certified copy of the court order.  The court order specifies that an ignition interlock device must 
be used.  The vehicle is not equipped with an ignition interlock device. 
Is the driver committing a violation? 
                                                    YES                                          NO 
 
You conduct a traffic stop and the driver’s normal Texas license is suspended. The driver provides an 
occupational license. You ask to see the court order granting the license and the driver provides you 
with a certified copy of the court order.  The court order specifies that the operator may drive between 
6 AM and 5 PM.  The time of the traffic stop is 8:30 PM. 
Is the driver committing a violation? 
                                                    YES                                          NO 
 
521.271 – License Expiration  
This section sets forth the basic license expiration periods: 
Normal Driver’s License – on the person’s birthday after 8 years 
Provisional License – 18th birthday of the license holder 
Learner License – 18th birthday of the license holder 
Occupational License – 1 year after court order granting the license is issued 
Person who resides in a Correctional Facility – on the person’s birthday after one year  
Non-Citizen – on the person’s birthday after 6 years or when lawful presence in the US ends, 
whichever is first. If there is no definite expiration for lawful presence, license expires in one year. 
521.2711 – License Expiration: Person at Least 85 Years of Age 
If the license holder is 85 years of age or older, the license expires on the license holder’s second 
birthday after the date of the license application. 
521.292 – Department’s Determination for License Suspension 
This is a list of circumstances in which DPS will automatically suspend a person’s driver license.  A 
license will be suspended if the person:  
1) has operated a motor vehicle on a highway while the person's license was suspended, 
canceled, disqualified, or revoked; 
2) is a habitually reckless or negligent operator of a motor vehicle; 
3) is a habitual violator of the traffic laws; 
A habitual violator is a person who has 4 or more convictions in 12 months or 7 or more 
convictions in 24 months, not counting a violation of 621.101 (weight restrictions), 621.201 
(width restrictions), 621.203 (length restrictions), 621.207 (load extensions), Chapter 623 
(permits), or 545.413 (seatbelt laws). 
4) has permitted the unlawful or fraudulent use of the person's license; 
5) has committed an offense in another state or Canadian province that, if committed in this 
state, would be grounds for suspension; 
6) has been convicted of two or more separate offenses of a violation of a restriction imposed on 
the use of the license; 
7) has been responsible as a driver for any collision resulting in serious personal injury or serious 
property damage; 
8) is under 18 years of age and has been convicted of two or more moving violations committed 
within a 12-month period; or 
9) has committed an offense under Section 545.421. 
Reference 521.293 – the period of this automatic suspension will be 90 days. 
Word Association:  Habitual Violator  4 in 12 months, 7 in 24 months  Automatic Suspension 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 55 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
521.350 – Suspension for Racing on Public Highway or Street 
A person’s Texas driver’s license will be automatically suspended for one year and they will have to 
perform at least 10 hours of community service upon conviction for Racing (545.420). 
Word Association:  Racing  one year suspension (take that, Vin Diesel) 
521.451 – General Violation 
This section describes numerous driver license/ID card violations, all of which are Class A 
Misdemeanors. 
These violations can be committed with a Texas Driver’s License OR an Identification Certificate (ID 
card): 
1) display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in the person's possession a fictitious or 
altered DL or ID card; 
2) lend the person's DL or ID card to another person; 
3) display or represent as the person's own a DL or ID card not issued to the person; 
4) possess more than one currently valid DL or more than one currently valid ID card; or 
5) in an application for a DL or ID card, provide a false name, false address, counterfeit 
document, or knowingly make a false statement. 
(c) – if a person commits a violation of this section that is also a violation of Texas Alcoholic Beverage 
Code 106.07, they should be prosecuted under the Alcoholic Beverage Code.  This means if a person 
presents a fraudulent DL or ID to represent they are 21 YOA or older to a person selling or serving 
alcohol, they should be charged for that offense rather than an offense under this section of the TRC.  
An offense under TABC 106.07 is a Class C Misdemeanor.     
Note:  For a person under 21 years of age who possesses a false DL or ID card for the purposes of 
representing that they are 21 years of age or older, enforcement can be taken for a Class C 
misdemeanor under 521.453  (Fictitious License or Certificate for Person Younger than 21 YOA). 
521.453 – Fictitious License or Certificate 
It is an offense for a person under 21 years-of-age to possess a document that is deceptively similar to a 
driver’s license or ID card with the intent of misrepresenting their age unless the card states “NOT A 
GOVERNMENT DOCUMENT” clearly and indelibly on both the front and back. 
This applies to Texas and out of state licenses and ID cards.  The document is considered to be 
deceptively similar if a reasonable person would assume it was a legitimate license or ID card. 
A peace officer may confiscate this document. 
This offense is a Class C Misdemeanor. 
Note:  If the person possesses a fraudulent DL or ID card with intent other than to misrepresent their 
age, they may be more appropriately prosecuted under 521.451 for a more serious criminal offense.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 56 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Apply It: 
Which statement is most accurate? 
You conduct a traffic stop.  The driver is 19 years old and 
provides a legitimate Texas driver’s license.  The driver is 
extremely nervous.  You request consent to search the vehicle 
and the driver grants consent.  In the center console, you find 
this Hawaii driver’s license bearing the drivers photograph.  
There is no return in the system for the driver’s license.  The 
driver tells you it is a novelty card that he only uses to flash at 
gas station clerks to buy beer. 
a) There is no violation because the driver did not present the card to the officer 
b) There is no violation because it is not a fraudulent Texas license 
c) The driver should be charged with a Class A misdemeanor (Fictitious DL) under 521.451 
d) The driver should be charged with a Class C misdemeanor (Deceptively Similar DL/ID Under 21) 
under 521.453 
e) C and D are both viable options 
521.457 – Driving While License Invalid 
This offense is generally a Class C Misdemeanor, but can be enhanced all the way to a Class A 
Misdemeanor in certain circumstances. 
“Suspended”, “Denied”, “Revoked” and “Cancelled” licenses are all invalid. 
Discussion Point:  This offense is specific to a license that is canceled, suspended, denied, or revoked 
under the laws of “this state”.  A person with an out of state license that is suspended should not be 
prosecuted under this section.  If their out of state license is suspended, consider them to be unlicensed 
and they should be prosecuted for No Driver License under 521.021. 
Class C Misdemeanor DWLI – first offense. 
Class B Misdemeanor DWLI (any of the following): 
• The person has a previous DWLI conviction. 
• The person is operating without insurance/proof of financial responsibility per 601.191. 
• The person’s driving privileges have previously been suspended for an offense related to the 
operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated. 
Class A Misdemeanor DWLI – (1) the person’s license is invalid, (2) they are not maintaining financial 
responsibility (insurance), (3) and they cause a crash that results in SBI or death of another person. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 57 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 58 
 
Can DWLI be filed against an unlicensed person?  Yes. Remember the definition of “License” in 521.001 – the authorization to operate a motor vehicle that is issued under or granted by the laws of this state.  
The term includes (A) a driver’s license; (B) the privilege of a person to operate a motor vehicle regardless 
of whether the person holds a driver’s license; and (C) a nonresident’s operating privileges.”.  A person 
who has never had a Texas driver license can still have their privilege/authority to drive denied or 
revoked and can be charged with DWLI.  
Example: A person holds only a Texas ID card.  They are arrested for DWI and refuse to provide a 
specimen of their breath for analysis.  Texas applies a 180 suspension against their driving privileges, 
meaning they cannot obtain a Texas license – even if they meet all other requirements – until the 
suspension period is over.  If you find this person driving, they are committing the offense of DWLI 
because they are operating a vehicle during a period their driving privilege is suspended. 
 
Reference CCP 14.06(c) and (d)(7) – DWLI is one of the offenses for which a person can be cited and 
released even if they are committing a class B or A level misdemeanor. 
Apply It: 
 
You conduct a stop.  The driver’s Texas license is suspended.  You review their driving history and see 
that have been suspended multiple times before for unpaid surcharges and for being a habitual violator.  
They show no previous convictions for DWLI.  What level of offense is the driver committing? 
 
        ____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
You conduct a stop.  The driver’s Texas license is suspended.  You review their driving history and see 
that four years ago they received a 6 month suspension because they were arrested for DWI.  They have 
no previous convictions for DWLI.  What level of offense is the driver committing? 
 
       ____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
You conduct a traffic stop.  The driver’s Texas license is suspended, but they have no previous 
convictions for DWLI and no previous alcohol related suspensions.  The driver provides an expired 
insurance card and tells you his insurance lapsed last week and he hasn’t had a chance to purchase new 
insurance.  What level of offense is the driver committing? 
       ____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
You are working a crash.  Mr. Johnson was sitting stationary at a red light when he was rear-ended by 
another vehicle.  As a result of the crash, the driver of the other vehicle was killed.  Mr. Johnson’s Texas 
driver’s license was revoked two years ago and he does not have insurance for his vehicle.  What level of 
offense did Mr. Johnson commit at the time of the crash? 
____________________________________________________________________ 
You are working a crash.  Mr. Johnson runs a stop sign and strikes another vehicle.  The driver of the 
other vehicle suffers a broken femur and a traumatic brain injury.  Mr. Johnson’s Texas driver’s license is 
suspended.  He has several previous convictions for DWLI.  Mr. Johnson provides proof of insurance for 
his vehicle.  What level of offense did Mr. Johnson commit at the time of the crash? 
____________________________________________________________________ 
521.458 – Permitting Unauthorized Person to Drive 
(a) Parents may not permit or cause their minor child (under 18 YOA) to drive without a license or 
otherwise in violation of Chapter 521. 
(b) It is a violation for anyone to allow a person to drive their vehicle knowing the person is unlicensed 
or otherwise in violation of Chapter 521. 
521.460 – Motor Vehicle Rentals 
Car rental companies cannot rent a vehicle to an unlicensed person.   
They must also maintain specific detailed records about rented vehicles and drivers.  They are required 
to show the records to a peace officer upon request. 
521.461 – General Criminal Penalty 
Unless otherwise specified or enhanced, an offense under Chapter 521 is a misdemeanor with a fine not 
to exceed $200. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 59 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 2.2 – CHAPTER 522 - COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES 
This section continues BPOC Objective 22.7 - Identify who may and who may not be licensed to drive 
in the state of Texas, and the types and classes of licenses that exist under Texas statutes and 
understand the restrictions thereon. 
522.003 – Definitions   
(3) Commercial Driver's License – a license issued to an individual that authorizes the individual to drive 
a class of commercial motor vehicle. 
(4) Commercial Learner's Permit – a permit that restricts the holder to driving a commercial motor 
vehicle with another licensed operator in the front seat observing and giving instruction. 
A person is required to hold a Commercial Driver’s License if both of the following criteria are present: 
1)  The vehicle being operated meets the definition of a Commercial Motor Vehicle in Chapter 522; and 
2) The person must not be exempt from CDL requirements by TRC 522.004 (Applicability). 
What is a “Commercial Motor Vehicle” for the purposes of Driver’s License Law?  
(5) Commercial motor vehicle – has the meaning assigned by 49 C.F.R. Section 383.5 (see below): 
Commercial motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used in 
commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle is a: 
(1) Combination Vehicle (Group A)—having a gross combination weight rating or gross combination 
weight of 26,001 pounds or more, whichever is greater, inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a gross 
vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds, whichever is greater; or 
(2) Heavy Straight Vehicle (Group B)—having a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of 
26,001 pounds or more, whichever is greater; or 
(3) Small Vehicle (Group C) that does not meet Group A or B requirements but that either— (i) Is 
designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or (ii) Is of any size and is used in 
the transportation of hazardous materials. 
Why is this Important?  When someone is operating a vehicle that meets the definition of a 
“commercial motor vehicle”, they generally should hold a commercial driver’s license unless they’re 
one of the specifically excepted people (list of exceptions can be found in 522.004). 
(17) Gross Combination Weight Rating – the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight 
of a combination or articulated vehicle or, if the manufacturer has not specified a value, the sum of the 
gross vehicle weight rating of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit or units and any load 
on a towed unit. 
(18) Gross Vehicle Weight Rating – the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a 
single vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 60 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Who is specifically exempt from CDL requirements even though they are operating a vehicle that may 
meet the definition of “commercial motor vehicle”? 
522.004 – Applicability 
The individuals on this list are exempt from CDL requirements even though they may be driving a larger 
vehicle that meets the definition of commercial motor vehicle.  These people are ONLY exempt from 
CDL requirements.  They are still required to have an elevated class of license if they are operating larger 
vehicles as described in 521.081 and 521.082. 
Exempt from CDL Requirements: 
(1)  Farm vehicles within 150 miles of the farm while transporting farm products and not used in the 
operations of a common or contract motor carrier.  (NOTE: Farmers now have a broader exemption 
under #8 below, so they are generally no longer limited to 150 miles). 
(2)  Fire Fighting or Emergency Vehicles 
(3)  Military Vehicles – when operated by military personnel for military purposes. 
(4)  Recreational Vehicles (RVs) – defined as a motor vehicle primarily designed as temporary living 
quarters for recreational camping or travel use. The term includes a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck 
camper, and motor home. 
(5)  Vehicles used by air carriers – when operated exclusively on airport property where the public does 
not have access.  
(6)  Cotton Vehicles – when used exclusively to transport seed cotton modules or burrs.   
(7)  A vehicle operated intrastate and not in commerce 
(8)  A covered farm vehicle per 49 CFR Section 390.5 
What is a covered farm vehicle? 
• Operated by an owner or operator of a farm or ranch, or by a family member or employee of 
the owner or operator. 
• Transports agricultural commodities, livestock, machinery or supplies to or from a farm or ranch 
• Has a license plate or some other means specified by the state that identifies it as a farm vehicle  
• Is not used in for-hire motor carrier  
• Is not transporting hazardous materials that require placarding, and either of the following: 
o Has a GVW or GVWR of 26,001 or less, in which case the CFV exemptions apply anywhere in 
the United States. 
o Has a GVW or GVWR of more than 26,001 pounds and travels within the State where it is 
registered or, if traveling out of the State where it is registered, stays within a 150 air miles of 
the owner or operator’s farm or ranch. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 61 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 62 
Apply It: 
You stop this truck and travel trailer for speeding.  The truck’s 
GVWR is 14,000 pounds.  The travel trailer’s GVWR is 20,000 
pounds. 
Does this combination meet the weight requirements of a 
commercial motor vehicle?                      
                                        YES                    NO 
Is the driver required to hold a commercial driver license? 
                                YES                     NO 
If not, what class of license is the driver required to hold? 
 
 ____________________________________________________ 
 
 
You are dispatched to work this crash involving a fire truck.  
The fire truck’s GVWR is 60,000 pounds.  The operator of the 
fire truck hands you his driver’s license.  It is a Non-CDL Class B 
license. 
Does this vehicle meet the weight requirements of a 
commercial motor vehicle? 
                                     YES                       NO 
Did the operator commit a violation by operating this vehicle 
without a commercial driver’s license? 
                  YES                        NO 
 
You stop this truck tractor/semi-trailer hauling watermelons.  The 
driver explains he works for a farm in Brownsville, where he loaded.  
He is on his way to a distribution center in Dallas (550 miles away). 
The truck tractor’s GVWR is 45,000 pounds.  The trailer’s GVWR is 
40,000 pounds. 
Does this combination meet the weight requirements of a 
commercial motor vehicle?                      
                                        YES                    NO 
Is the driver required to hold a commercial driver license? 
                                        YES                     NO 
If not, what class of license is the driver required to hold? 
 
                                                 ____________________________________________________ 
522.011 – License or Permit Required; Offense 
This is the general law requiring the operator of a commercial motor vehicle to hold a valid CDL. 
It is a violation to operate a commercial motor vehicle without a commercial driver’s license or with a 
CDL that is not for the correct class of vehicle being operated. It is also a violation to operate a 
commercial motor vehicle while the person’s CDL is disqualified or subject to an out-of-service order. 
A person holding a commercial learner’s permit must have a licensed operator observing their driving 
and providing instruction while operating a commercial motor vehicle. 
This offense carries a fine not to exceed $500.  The fine increases to $1000 for a subsequent conviction 
within one year. 
There are eight exceptions to the CDL requirements.  These exceptions are described in  522.004. 
DPS Arrest Titles:  License or Permit Required – No Valid CDL 
License or Permit Required – CDL Disqualified or Out of Service 
522.041 – Classifications 
Reminder – the definition of a commercial motor vehicle: 
(1) Combination Vehicle having a gross combination weight rating or gross combination weight of 
26,001 pounds or more inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle 
weight of more than 10,000 pounds; or 
(2) Heavy Straight Vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of 26,001 
pounds or more; or 
(3) Small Vehicle that does not meet (1) or (2) requirements but that either designed to transport 16 
or more passengers, including the driver; or is of any size and is used in the transportation of 
hazardous materials. 
Class A CDL  
• A combination of vehicles with GCWR of 26,001 or more when the towed vehicle has a GVWR of 
more than 10,000. 
Class B CDL 
• A single unit with a GVWR of 26,001 or more 
• A unit with a GVWR of 26,001 or more towing a vehicle with a GVWR of 10,000 or less 
• A vehicle with a passenger capacity of 24 or more (including driver). 
Class C CDL  
• A CMV not otherwise described, such as a vehicle with a passenger capacity of 16-23 people or 
any vehicle hauling hazmat that does not meet the weight requirements for a Class A or B CDL. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 63 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
CDL Class 
Flow Chart 
Apply It: 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
GVWR 36,000 
GVWR 54,000 
YES        
  NO 
GVWR 25,000 
GVWR 54,000 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
YES        
  NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 64 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
GVWR 25,000 
GVWR 10,000 
GVWR 27,000 
GVWR 9,000 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
GVWR 26,000 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
GVWR 26,001 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
522.042 – Endorsements; Offense 
If officers encounter one of the described commercial motor vehicles, they should be aware that it is a 
violation to operate the vehicle without the proper endorsement: 
 
HAZMAT – H endorsement 
Double or Triple Trailer – T endorsement 
Passengers – P endorsement 
Tank Vehicle – N endorsement 
HAZMAT and Tank Combined – X endorsement 
School Bus – S endorsement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 passengers 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
25 passengers 
Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
GVWR 2,200 Is this a commercial motor vehicle? 
       YES          NO 
What class of license is required to 
operate this vehicle? 
_______________________________ 
522.101 – Driving While Having Alcohol in System Prohibited 
A person may not drive a commercial motor vehicle with any measurable or detectable amount of 
alcohol in the person’s system.  If a CDL holder is driving a non-commercial motor vehicle, this section 
does not apply.   
If a driver violates this section, they shall be placed out of service for 24 hours.  Any peace officer can do 
this, not just federally certified officers.  Peace officers place the driver out of service by filling out the 
MCS-10 form (example below). 
Word Association:  Commercial Motor Vehicle   Any Detectable Alcohol    24 Hours Out of Service 
Note:  Be aware, there are additional steps to this process that are not part of BPOC learning objectives.  
An officer requesting a specimen from a CMV driver must read the DIC-55 Statutory Warnings to the 
driver.  If the driver refuses to provide a specimen or gives a specimen with an alcohol level is .04 or 
more, their CDL should be confiscated and they should be served with the DIC-57 form giving notice of 
CDL disqualification.  The officer then fills out form DIC-54 giving notice to the Department. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 67 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 2 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
1. Which of the following is NOT exempt from the driver license requirement?   
a. Operator of a farm tractor 
b. Operator of a moped 
c. Operator of a road machine 
d. Operator of military vehicle in the scope of military service 
2. Unless specifically excepted, a person must hold a driver license to operate a motor vehicle in 
any public place in the state of Texas.   
a. True 
b. False 
3. When a person moves to Texas from a different state, how many days do they have to obtain a 
Texas driver’s license?  
_________________________________________    
4. When a person moves to a new residence in Texas, how many days do they have to update the 
address information on their driver’s license?  
_________________________________________    
5. What is the minimum age to obtain a Texas driver’s license? 
_________________________________________    
6.  What class of license is required to operate the following vehicle:  A pickup with a GVWR of 
14,000 pounds towing a travel trailer with a GVWR of 15,000 pounds.   
a. Class C Non-CDL 
b. Class B Non-CDL                                                         
c. Class A Non-CDL 
d. Class A CDL 
7. What class of license is required to operate the following vehicle:  A truck tractor in commerce 
with a GVWR of 54,000 pounds towing a trailer with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds. 
a. Class A CDL 
b. Class B CDL                                                                
c. Class C CDL 
d. Class A Non-CDL 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 68 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
8. What class of license is required to operate the following vehicle:  A bus transporting passengers 
for hire with a passenger capacity of 26 people, including the driver. 
a. Class A CDL 
b. Class B CDL                                                                   
c. Class C CDL 
d. Class B Non-CDL 
9.   There are two circumstances where a person holding an occupational license can be charged 
with a Class B Misdemeanor.  List each below: 
______________________________________________          
______________________________________________ 
10.   A habitual violator is defined as receiving ________ or more convictions in ________ 
consecutive months, or _________ more convictions in _________ months. 
11.   What happens if a person meets the definition of a habitual violator?   
a. They are issued a letter of reprimand 
b. They must pay an annual surcharge on their license 
c. Their driver license is suspended 
d. Their vehicle is impounded 
12. A person with a suspended driver license causes a traffic crash which results in serious bodily 
injury to another.  At the time of the crash, the person does not have insurance on their vehicle.  
The person may be charged with DWLI as a:  
a. Class C Misdemeanor 
b. Class B Misdemeanor                                                                     
c. Class A Misdemeanor 
d. State Jail Felony 
13. A person driving with a suspended driver’s license who does not have insurance or any other 
type of financial responsibility for their vehicle commits a:  
a. Class C Misdemeanor 
b. Class B Misdemeanor                                                 
c. Class A Misdemeanor  
d. State Jail Felony 
14. A CDL holder operating their personal vehicle may be placed out of service for if they have 
detectable alcohol in their system while driving. 
a. True                                                                                     
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 69 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
15.  A person operating a commercial motor vehicle with detectable alcohol in their system shall be 
placed out of service for 48 hours. 
a. True                                                                                     
b. False 
16. Which of the following is not exempt from the requirement to hold a commercial driver’s 
license?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
a. A person operating a covered farm vehicle                         
b. A person operating a large RV with a GVWR of 30,000 pounds 
c. A firefighter operating a fire engine with a GVWR of 60,000 pounds 
d. A person operating a full sized 18-wheeler intrastate and not for compensation 
e. All of the Above are exempt from CDL requirements 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 70 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 3 – TRC CHAPTERS 541 - 544 
SECTION 3.1 – CHAPTER 541 - DEFINITIONS 
Introduction to Subtitle C 
Chapter 541 is the first chapter in Subtitle C.  Subtitle C contains chapters 541 – 600.  This includes 
critically important chapters such as 545 – Operation and Movement of Vehicles and 547 – Vehicle 
Equipment. 
Notice every section in Chapter 541 begins “In this subtitle”.  Chapter 541 establishes definitions that 
are used throughout the most important subtitle in the Transportation Code from an enforcement 
standpoint. 
Before you can regulate it, you have to define it.  That’s what Chapter 541 is all about.  Setting the table 
for the laws and regulations through the rest of Subtitle C. 
BPOC Objective 22.2 - Define the following terms in the TC. 
541.001 – Persons 
(1) Escort flagger - has the meaning assigned by 623.008. 
"Escort flagger" means a person who: (A) has successfully completed a training program in traffic 
direction as defined by the basic peace officer course curriculum established by the Texas 
Commission on Law Enforcement; and (B) in accordance with a permit issued by the department 
under this subtitle, operates an escort flag vehicle or directs and controls the flow of traffic using a 
hand signaling device or an automated flagger assistance device. 
Why is this Important?   Obedience to escort flaggers is required by law (Reference 542.501). 
(1-a) Operator – a person who drives or has physical control of a vehicle. 
(2) Owner – a person who has a property interest in or title to a vehicle, including a person entitled to 
use and possess a vehicle subject to a security interest.  Excludes a lienholder and a lessee whose lease 
is not intended as security.  
Example:  A vehicle is financed through the bank.  The bank holds the title as the lienholder until the 
note is paid off, however the person who is making the payments is considered the owner 
throughout most of the TRC.   
(3) Pedestrian – a person on foot. 
(4) Person – individual, firm, partnership, association, or corporation. 
Note: “individual” is not defined in the TRC, however it is defined in Penal Code 1.07 – a human 
being who is alive, including an unborn child at every stage of gestation from fertilization until birth. 
(5) School Crossing Guard – a responsible person who is at least 18 years of age and is designated by a 
local authority to direct traffic in a school crossing zone for the protection of children going to or 
leaving a school.   
Why is this Important?   Obedience to school crossing guards is required by law (Reference 
542.501). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 71 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
541.002 – Governmental Authorities 
(1) Department – means Department of Public Safety for all of Subtitle C unless stated otherwise. 
(2) Director – public safety director (DPS Director). 
(3) Local Authority –county, municipality, or other local entity authorized to enact traffic laws.  Also 
includes a school district designating school crossing guards. 
(4) Police Officer – has authority to direct traffic and arrest traffic law violators.  
Note:  Obedience to police officers is required by law (Reference 542.501). 
(5) State – includes any state, district, commonwealth, territory, and insular possession of the United 
States and any area subject to the legislative authority of the United States of America.  (Reference 
Government Code 311.005) 
541.101 – Metropolitan Area 
Metropolitan Area – an area that contains at least one municipality with a population of at least 
100,000 and includes the adjacent municipalities and unincorporated urban districts.    
Note:  This phrase is only used once in Subtitle C (550.022) – there is a requirement to move vehicles 
from main lanes of a freeway in a metropolitan area following a collision if vehicles can be safely driven. 
541.102 – Restricted Districts 
It is important to know where to find the definitions of these districts because certain laws only apply in 
these districts and certain laws do not apply in these districts.  Example:  545.301 and 545.302 – 
regulations for stopping, standing, and parking are very different if a vehicle is not in a business or 
residence district. 
(1) Business District – buildings used for business or industrial purposes are located within a 600-foot 
segment along the highway and within that segment the buildings occupy at least 300 feet of frontage. 
(2) Residence District – at least 300 feet of the highway frontage is primarily improved with residences 
or buildings used for business purposes and residences. 
(3) Urban District – is not in a municipality, but is improved with structures that are used for business, 
industry, or dwelling houses and located at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of at least one
quarter mile on either side of the highway. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 72 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Objective 22.1 – Discuss traffic laws contained in the Transportation Code (TC) and their 
application. 
541.201 – Vehicles   
This section defines many different types of vehicles. Instead of a chronological examination of this 
section, we will group the vehicle types together into logical categories according to the diagram below: 
(23) Vehicle – a device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway.  Does 
not include a device used on stationary rails/tracks and does not include manufactured housing. 
Motor Vehicles 
(11) Motor Vehicle – a self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from 
overhead trolley wires.  The term does not include an electric bicycle or an electric personal assistive 
mobility device (Segway). 
Passenger Car 
(12) Passenger Car – a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, used to transport persons and 
designed to accommodate 10 or fewer passengers, including the operator. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 73 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(3) Bus – there are two definitions for “bus”: 
A. a motor vehicle used to transport persons and designed to accommodate more than 10 
passengers, including the operator; or  
B. a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used to transport persons for 
compensation. 
Buses 
Tractors 
(16) School Bus – manufactured in compliance with the federal motor vehicle safety 
standards for school buses and used to transport students on a route to or from 
school or on a school-related activity trip.  
(11-a) Multifunction School Activity Bus – built like a school bus, but cannot be the 
same color as a school bus (Reference 547.7012).  Also does not have flashing red 
lights and stop arms like a school bus and does not transport students on routes 
to/from school.  For other school-related trips. 
(15) School Activity Bus – designed to accommodate more than 15 passengers. Used 
to transport public school students on a school-related activity trip, but does not 
transport students on routes to and from school. 
Tractors 
(4) Farm Tractor – a motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement to 
draw an implement of husbandry, including a plow or a mowing machine. 
Notes:  The operator of a farm tractor on the highway is not required to hold a driver’s 
license (521.027).  A farm tractor operated temporarily on the highway is not required 
to be registered (per DMV Registration Manual). 
(14) Road Tractor – a motor vehicle 
designed and used to draw another 
vehicle but not constructed to carry a 
load independently or a part of the 
weight of the other vehicle or its load. 
(22) Truck Tractor – a motor vehicle 
designed and used primarily to draw 
another vehicle but not constructed to 
carry a load other than a part of the 
weight of the other vehicle and its load. 
Pulling only, 
not supporting 
weight 
Pulling AND 
supporting weight 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 74 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(21) Truck – a motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily to transport property. 
Truck 
Moped 
Motorcycle 
Trailer 
Semitrailer 
(7) Light Truck – a truck, including a pickup truck, panel delivery truck, or carryall truck, 
that has a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of 2,000 pounds or less. 
(8) Moped – a motor vehicle that is: 
• equipped with a rider's saddle 
• not more than three wheels on the ground 
• cannot attain a speed in one mile of more than 30 miles per hour 
• cannot produce more than five-brake horsepower 
• has a piston displacement of 50 cubic centimeters or less 
• connects to a power drive system that does not require the operator to shift gears. 
Notes:  A Class M license is not required to operate a moped and they are generally 
treated like bicycles in subtitle C (551.002), although a Class C driver’s license is 
required to operate on the highway. 
(9) Motorcycle – a motor vehicle that is equipped with a rider's saddle and designed to 
have when propelled not more than three wheels on the ground. 
Towed Vehicles 
(20) Trailer – designed to be drawn by a motor 
vehicle and to transport persons or property 
and constructed so that no part of the vehicle's 
weight and load rests on the motor vehicle. 
(17) Semitrailer – designed to be drawn by a 
motor vehicle and to transport persons or 
property and constructed so that part of the 
vehicle's weight and load rests on or is carried 
by another vehicle.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 75 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
House Trailer 
Pole Trailer 
Towable RV 
Authorized Emergency Vehicle 
(5) House Trailer – a trailer or semitrailer, other than a towable recreational vehicle, that: 
A. is transportable in one or more sections; 
B. is less than 45 feet in length; 
C. is built on a permanent chassis; 
D. is designed to be used as a dwelling or for commercial purposes; and 
E. includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. 
(13) Pole Trailer – designed to be drawn by another vehicle and secured to the other 
vehicle by pole, reach, boom, or other security device and ordinarily used to transport a 
long or irregularly shaped loads generally capable of sustaining themselves as beams 
between the supporting connections. 
(19) Towable Recreational Vehicle – nonmotorized vehicle that is: 
• designed to be towable by a motor vehicle 
• for temporary human habitation for uses including recreational camping or seasonal 
use 
• permanently built on a single chassis 
• may contain one or more life-support systems 
Other Vehicles 
(1) Authorized Emergency Vehicle 
A. fire department or police vehicle 
B. public or private ambulance 
C. emergency medical services vehicle 
D. municipal department or public service corporation emergency vehicle 
E. county-owned or county-leased emergency management vehicle  
F. state emergency management vehicle 
G. private vehicle of a volunteer firefighter or a certified emergency medical services 
employee when responding to a fire alarm or medical emergency 
H. industrial emergency response vehicle when responding to an emergency 
I. 
vehicle of a blood bank or tissue bank when making emergency deliveries of blood, 
drugs, medicines, or organs; 
J. 
vehicle used for law enforcement purposes that is owned or leased by a federal 
governmental entity 
K. a private vehicle of an employee or volunteer of a county emergency management 
division in a county with a population of more than 52,600 and less than 55,000. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 76 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Police Vehicle 
Bicycle 
E-Bicycle 
Implement of Husbandry 
Special Mobile Equip. 
(13-a) Police Vehicle – must be used by a peace officer for law enforcement purposes, and 
owned by one of the following: 
1) a governmental entity, 
2) the police department of a private university that commissions peace officers, OR 
3) privately owned by the officer and approved by the head of the police officer’s agency 
for law enforcement purposes. 
(2) Bicycle – capable of being ridden solely using human power and has one of the 
following: 
A. two tandem wheels at least one of which is more than 14 inches in diameter; 
B. three wheels, two of which are in parallel, and at least one of the three wheels is 
more than 14 inches in diameter; or 
C. any number of wheels and adaptive technology that allows the device to be ridden by 
a person with a disability. 
(24) Electric Bicycle – defined in 664.001 – a bicycle equipped with: 
• fully operable pedals 
• an electric motor of fewer than 750 watts; and 
• a top assisted speed of 28 miles per hour or less. 
(6) Implement of Husbandry – there are three ways a vehicle can meet this definition. 
A. a vehicle, other than a passenger car or truck, that is designed and adapted for use as 
a farm implement, machinery, or tool for tilling the soil; 
B. a towed vehicle that transports to the field and spreads fertilizer or agricultural 
chemicals; or 
C. a motor vehicle designed and adapted to deliver feed to livestock. 
Notes:  The operator of an implement of husbandry on the highway is not required to 
hold a driver’s license (521.027).  An implement of husbandry operated temporarily on 
the highway is not required to be registered (per DMV Registration Manual). 
(18) Special Mobile Equipment – a vehicle that is not designed or used primarily to 
transport persons or property and that is only incidentally operated on a highway. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 77 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
541.202 – Rail Transportation 
(1) Railroad – a carrier that operates cars on stationary rails to transport persons or property. 
(2) Railroad Train – a steam engine or electric or other motor with or without an attached car 
operated on rails, other than a streetcar. 
Note:  What about other equipment operated on railroad tracks that is not a traditional locomotive 
or train engine? See 545.001 – "On-track equipment".  On-track equipment has the same right-of
way as a railroad train. 
541.203 – Equipment 
(1) Exhaust Emission System – designed to control or reduce emission of substances from a motor 
vehicle or engine.  Only applies to vehicles of a model year 1968 or later. 
• Reference 547.605 – Emission System Required 
(2) Metal Tire – a tire the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly made of 
metal or other hard, non-resilient material. 
• Reference 547.612 – it is generally illegal to operate a vehicle with a metal tire in contact with 
the highway (there are a few exceptions for some farm vehicles). 
(3) Muffler – a device that reduces noise using a mechanical design to receive exhaust gas from an 
internal combustion engine or turbine wheels to receive exhaust gas from a diesel engine. 
• Reference 547.604 – a muffler is a required piece of vehicle equipment to operate on a highway. 
(4) Solid Tire – a tire that is made of rubber or another resilient material and does not use compressed 
air to support its load. 
• Reference 545.361 – maximum speed of 10 MPH for vehicle with solid rubber tires. 
BPOC Objective 22.3 – Define the following terms in the TC, as it relates to traffic, traffic areas, and 
traffic control. 
541.301 – Traffic      
Traffic – means the following while using a highway for the purpose of travel: 
• Pedestrians 
• Ridden or herded animals 
• conveyances, including vehicles and streetcars 
541.302 – Traffic Areas 
(1) Alley – a street that is not used primarily for through traffic and provides access to rear entrances 
of buildings or lots along a street. 
(2) Crosswalk – crosswalks can be marked or unmarked. 
• Marked – the portion of a roadway designated as a pedestrian crossing by surface markings, 
including lines 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 78 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
• Unmarked – the portion of a roadway at an intersection that is within the connections of the 
lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway. 
(3) Freeway – a divided, controlled-access highway for through traffic. 
(4) Freeway Main Lane – a freeway lane having an uninterrupted flow of through traffic. 
(5) Highway or Street – the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any part of 
which is open to the public for vehicular travel. 
The highway includes big roads, small roads, paved roads, unpaved roads – any publicly maintained road 
that is open to the public.  The “highway” includes the entire right-of-way including ditches and 
shoulders.   
• Reference 542.001 – most of the offenses and regulation in the TRC only apply to vehicles being 
operated on the “highway”. 
(6) Improved Shoulder – a paved shoulder. 
• Reference 545.058 – Driving on the improved shoulder is only legal in specific circumstances. 
(7) Laned Roadway – a roadway divided into at least two clearly marked lanes for vehicular travel. 
• Reference 545.060 – Driving on Roadway Laned for Traffic 
(8) Limited-access or Controlled-access Highway – right of access and access to enter or exit the 
highway or roadway is restricted under law except at a place and in the manner determined by the 
authority that has jurisdiction over the highway or roadway. 
(9) Private Road or Driveway – a privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel and used only 
by the owner and persons who have the owner's express or implied permission. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 79 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(10) Ramp – an interconnecting roadway of a traffic interchange or a connecting roadway between 
highways at different levels or between parallel highways, that allows a vehicle to enter or exit a 
roadway. 
(11) Roadway – the portion of a highway, other than the berm or shoulder, that is improved, designed, 
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.  If a highway includes at least two separate roadways, the term 
applies to each roadway separately.   
• The roadway does not include shoulders. It only includes the main lanes of the highway. 
(12) Safety Zone – the area in a roadway officially designated for exclusive pedestrian use and that is 
protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while so 
designated. 
• Reference 545.403 – vehicles are not permitted to drive through or in a safety zone. 
(13) School Crossing Zone – a reduced-speed zone designated on a street by a local authority to 
facilitate safe crossing of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or 
secondary school during the time the reduced speed limit applies.  When reduced speed is not required 
(i.e. signs are not activated) it is no longer a school crossing zone. 
• Reference 541.001(5) – Definition of school crossing guard 
• Reference 542.501 – Obedience required to school crossing guard.  A school crossing guard only 
has traffic directing authority while in a school crossing zone. 
(14) School Crosswalk – a crosswalk designated on a street by a local authority to facilitate safe 
crossing of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or secondary 
school. 
(15) Shoulder – the portion of a highway that is adjacent to the roadway, designed or ordinarily used 
for parking, distinguished from the roadway by different design, construction, or marking, and not 
intended for normal vehicular travel. 
(16) Sidewalk – the portion of a street that is between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the 
adjacent property line and intended for pedestrian use. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 80 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
541.303 – Intersection 
Intersection – the common area at the junction of two highways – does 
not include the junction of a highway with a private drive or alley.  
Only includes the common area of the roadways of each highway, meaning 
the main travel lanes.  The intersection does not include the shoulders.   
If the roadways of intersecting highways do not meet at a right angle, the 
“intersection” is the place where vehicles could collide if traveling on each of the roadways.  
(c) if the intersection includes a divided highway with roadways at least 30 feet apart (i.e. a 30’ median) 
then each roadway of the divided highway will be considered to be its own intersection.  If the dividing 
median is less than 30 feet, both roadways are included in one intersection.  
Two separate intersections                                                    
 One continuous intersection 
• Reference 545.101 –Turning at an Intersection – turns at intersections have to be made in a 
prescribed manner. 
541.304 – Traffic Control 
(1) Official Traffic-Control Device – a sign, signal, marking, or device that: 
• is consistent with this subtitle 
• placed or erected by a public body or officer having jurisdiction 
• used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic 
Reference 544.004 – Obedience to Official Traffic Control Device – before this charge can be filed, we 
must make sure the device meets the definition of “official traffic control device”. 
(2) Railroad Sign or Signal – a sign, signal, or device erected by a railroad, public body, or public officer 
to notify traffic of railroad tracks or an approaching railroad train. 
(3) Traffic-Control Signal – a manual, electric, or mechanical device that alternately directs traffic to stop 
and to proceed.  This is usually a red, yellow, green traffic light. 
• Reference 544.007 – Traffic Control Signals in General 
•  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 81 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Objective 22.4 – Define the various miscellaneous terms listed in Chapter 541, TC. 
541.401 – Miscellaneous Term 
(1) Daytime – ½ hour before sunrise to ½ hour after sunset. 
(4) Gross Vehicle Weight – the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of its load.  This is the actual weight 
of a vehicle if you were to roll it onto a scale. 
(5) Nighttime – ½ hour after sunset to ½ hour before sunrise. 
(9) Stand or Standing – to halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle.  If vehicle is halted temporarily to 
receive/discharge passengers, it is not considered to be standing. 
(6) Park or Parking – To stand (halt) an occupied or unoccupied vehicle.  If vehicle is halted to load or 
unload merchandise or passengers, it is not considered to be parked. 
(10) Stop or Stopping – there are two definitions – when required and when prohibited.  Sometimes 
the TRC says that a vehicle MUST stop somewhere (when required).  Sometimes the TRC says that a 
vehicle is prohibited from stopping somewhere (when prohibited). 
• When stopping is required, it means the complete cessation of movement.   
• When stopping is prohibited, it means halting the vehicle, even momentarily, is prohibited.  But 
this does not apply to a vehicle that is 1) avoiding conflict with other traffic, 2) Complying with 
the direction of a police officer, or 3) Complying with a traffic-control device.   
Apply It: 
A vehicle comes to a stop directly in front of this sign.  The driver places the 
vehicle in park, exits the vehicle, and walks around to open the back door.  He 
helps an elderly woman out of the vehicle and she enters a nearby store.  The 
driver gets back in the vehicle and pulls away. 
Has the driver committed a violation by standing or parking in a prohibited 
location? 
YES                             
 NO 
Why or why not?  ________________________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 82 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 83 
TRC 545.302 clearly states a vehicle may not stop, stand, 
or park a vehicle in an intersection. 
 
This 18-wheeler has been stopped for 45 seconds blocking 
an intersection as it waits at the yield sign.  It is eventually 
struck by the blue vehicle. 
 
Has the operator of the 18-wheeler committed a violation 
for stopping in a prohibited location? 
 
                         YES                            NO 
 
Why or why not?  ________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
TRC 545.301 clearly states a vehicle may not stop, stand, or park 
in the roadway outside a business or residence district. 
 
This blue vehicle is stopped in the inside lane of the roadway.  Is 
the operator of this vehicle committing a violation for stopping 
where prohibited? 
 
   YES                    NO 
 
Why or why not? _____________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) Personal Injury – an injury that requires treatment.  This term is defined here, but only used once in 
the subtitle (as an enhancement for the racing statute in 545.420). 
 
(8) Right-of-Way – the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to 
another vehicle or pedestrian that is approaching from a direction, at a speed, and within a proximity 
that could cause a collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 84 
 
SECTION 3.2 – CHAPTER 542 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
BPOC Objective 22.6 – Explain the required obedience and the effect of the TC. 
542.001 – Vehicles on Highways 
This is a critical section to the application of the TRC. Provisions of Subtitle C only apply to vehicles being 
operated on the highway unless the provision specifically applies to a different place. This includes the 
moving violations in Chapter 545 and the equipment regulations in Chapter 547. 
• Reference 541.302(5) – Definition of “highway” – the width between the boundary lines of a 
publicly maintained way any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel.   
Apply It: 
 
You’re working a crash in a parking lot.  The red truck 
backed into the blue vehicle. 
TRC 545.415 states an operator may not back a vehicle 
unless that movement can be made safely. 
Can you cite the driver of the red pickup for Backed 
Without Safety?  
   YES                              NO 
 
 
 
 
You’re working this crash in a master planned community.  The 
community is not gated and anyone is allowed to drive through 
the neighborhood (open to the public). 
The roadways in the neighborhood were built by the HOA and 
they are maintained by the HOA. 
Can you cite the driver of the red pickup for disregarding the 
stop sign? 
 
                                YES                              NO 
 
 
 
 
parking lot 
Note: There are a few exceptions to this applicability because certain sections apply themselves to 
places other than a highway:  
• Reckless Driving (545.401) 
• Use of Portable Wireless Communication Device on School Property (545.4252) 
• FSRA – Felony (550.021) 
• FSRA – Misdemeanor/Fail to Stop and Give Information (550.022) 
• Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle(550.024) 
• Duty Upon Striking Structure/Fixture/Landscaping (550.025) 
• Fail to Maintain Financial Responsibility (601.191) 
542.002 – Government Vehicles 
Government vehicles must abide by the TRC just like other vehicles unless they have a specific 
exemption. 
542.003 – Animals and Animal-Drawn Vehicles 
People may ride animals or operate animal drawn vehicles in the roadway, however they must abide by 
traffic regulations aside from regulations that cannot, by their nature, apply. 
Note: There are equipment requirements for animal drawn vehicles described in Chapter 547 
(minimum lighting at night in 547.326, slow moving vehicle emblem in 547.703); however a ridden 
animal on the roadway is not required to have any additional equipment by the Transportation 
Code, even at night. 
542.004 – Persons and Equipment Engaged in Work on Highway Surface 
Subtitle C does not apply to a person, team, motor vehicle, or other equipment engaged in work on the 
highway surface unless a provision is specifically made applicable to them.   
These people and vehicles often have to stop in unusual places, drive contrary to normal traffic flow, 
and do other things that technically would violate the TRC if it were not for this section. 
542.005 – Rules on Private Property  
Private property owners are permitted to regulate traffic on their property. 
Note: Law enforcement cannot enforce these regulations on private property. 
Example:  Wal-Mart can put a stop sign in their parking lot to request that people stop in that 
location.  Law Enforcement cannot enforce such a stop sign (not on the “highway”).  Wal-Mart could 
technically enforce the stop sign by asking people to leave the premises if they disregard the stop 
sign.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 85 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
542.201 – General Rule of Uniformity 
Local authorities can regulate traffic in their jurisdiction by enacting ordinances.  They can be more 
restrictive than the TRC, but they cannot contradict the TRC. 
• Reference 541.002(3) – definition of local authority (a county, municipality, or other local entity) 
542.202 – Powers of Local Authorities 
This section describes in detail certain activities that local authorities can regulate via an ordinance: 
1) regulate traffic by police officers or traffic-control devices; 
2) regulate the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle; 
3) regulate or prohibit a procession or assemblage on a highway; 
4) regulate the operation and require registration and licensing of a bicycle or electric bicycle; 
5) regulate the time, place, and manner in which a roller skater may use a highway; 
6) regulate the speed of a vehicle in a public park; 
7) regulate or prohibit the turning of a vehicle or specified type of vehicle at an intersection; 
8) designate an intersection as a stop intersection or a yield intersection; 
9) designate a highway as a through highway; 
10) designate a highway as a one-way highway; 
11) designate school crossing guards and school crossing zones; 
12) alter a speed limit; or 
13) adopt other traffic rules specifically authorized by this subtitle. 
542.301 – General Offense 
This is the general offense language for all of Subtitle C (Chapters 541-600).  Unless otherwise specified, 
the offense is a misdemeanor.  The general penalty is described in 542.401 (a fine between $1 and 
$200). 
542.302 – Offense by Person Owning or Controlling Vehicle 
This is a general offense for a vehicle owner allowing someone to drive their vehicle in a manner that 
violates the law.  
542.303 – Inchoate Offenses 
A person who attempts or conspires to commit an act declared to be an offense by Subtitle C is guilty of 
the offense. 
542.401 – General Penalty 
Unless otherwise specified, the penalty for a violation of Subtitle C is a fine from $1 to $200. 
542.404 – Fine for Offenses in Construction or Maintenance Work Zone 
This section permits the doubling of fines for Subtitle C offenses committed in construction or 
maintenance work zones while workers are present.  The notice to appear (citation) must state on its 
face that workers were present when the offense was committed.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 86 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
The following chapters and sections are excluded: Chapter 548 (inspection violations), Chapter 552 
(pedestrian violations), 545.412 (child safety seat violations) and 545.413 (seatbelt violations). 
• Reference 472.022 – definition of Construction or Maintenance Work Zone. 
542.4045 – Penalties for Failure to Yield Right-of-Way 
This section allows for significantly increased fine amounts for right-of-way violations that cause bodily 
injury or serious bodily injury in crashes. 
bodily injury – the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than $500 or more than $2,000. 
serious bodily injury – the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than $1,000 or more than $4,000. 
542.501 – Obedience Required to Police Officers, School Crossing Guards, and Escort Flaggers 
The lawful order of a police officer, school crossing guard, or escort flagger must be obeyed.  
This section is essentially granting these individuals traffic direction abilities and should generally not be 
more broadly applied.  This offense is a Class C Misdemeanor. 
Police Officer –  541.002(4) – an officer authorized to direct traffic or arrest persons who violate traffic 
regulations. 
School Crossing Guard – 541.001(5) – a responsible person who is at least 18 years of age and is 
designated by a local authority to direct traffic in a school crossing zone for the protection of children 
going to or leaving a school. 
Escort Flagger – 623.008(a)(2) – a person who: (A)has successfully completed a training program in 
traffic direction as defined by the basic peace officer course curriculum established by the Texas 
Commission on Law Enforcement; and (B)in accordance with a permit issued by the department under 
this subtitle, operates an escort flag vehicle or directs and controls the flow of traffic using a hand 
signaling device or an automated flagger assistance device. 
DPS Guidance – DPS Legal Bulletin Issue #181, October/November 2014 – Limited Use of 542.501 – 
“Placement of the measure within the Transportation Code, statutory recognition of police officers’ 
responsibility to direct traffic, and recognition by the courts of the statute as a traffic control measure 
make clear that § 542.501 is specifically intended to be used for the direction of traffic; reliance upon it 
for orders not related to traffic control is not recommended.”  link 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 87 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 3.3 – CHAPTER 543 - ARREST AND PROSECUTION OF VIOLATORS 
BPOC Objective 22.20 – Discuss the regulations relating to arrest, and charging procedures, notices 
and promises to appear 
543.001 – Arrest Without a Warrant Authorized 
Any peace officer may arrest without warrant a person found committing a violation of this subtitle. 
Note: “Arrest” as used in this context could mean a custodial arrest and also means making a traffic 
stop.  As far as Chapter 543 is concerned, when an officer conducts a traffic stop they are “arresting” 
that person.  When they issue a citation, they are releasing that person from the arrest after they have 
signed a promise to appear. 
Important: although the TRC refers to a traffic stop as an “arrest”, officers should not conduct a “search 
incident to arrest” unless they actually make a custody arrest (i.e. handcuffs and taking someone to jail). 
543.002 – Person Arrested to Be Taken Before Magistrate 
There are some circumstances where a person must be “immediately taken before a magistrate”: 
(1) the person is arrested for failure to stop in the event of a collision causing damage to property; or
 (2) the person demands an immediate appearance or refuses to make a written notice to appear.
 Otherwise, officers generally take the action described in 545.003 (written notice to appear and 
release). 
543.003 – Notice to Appear; Person Not Taken Before Magistrate 
This is the alternative to taking someone before a magistrate when they have been “arrested” for a 
misdemeanor traffic violation.  They may be allowed to sign a promise to appear and they are released 
after promising to contact the court.  The officer must designate the time and place, the offense 
charged, and the driver’s information on the notice to appear. 
543.004 – Notice to Appear; Certain Offenses 
There are three offenses for which an officer shall issue a written notice to appear instead of making a 
custody arrest: 
(1) Speeding (545.351, 545.352)
 (2) Use of Wireless Communication Device (545.4251)
 (3) Open Container (PC 49.031)
 This applies only if the violator signs the notice to appear.  Does not apply to non-NRVC states (current 
states not a part of NRVC – Alaska, California, Michigan, Montana, Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin). 
These are the only three offenses for which issuance of a written notice to appear is mandatory. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 88 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code      
543.005 – Promise to Appear; Release 
Once the violator signs the promise to appear, the officer shall promptly release the violator.  
543.006 – Time and Place of Appearance 
The notice to appear must give the violator at least 10 days to contact the court.   
Citations must be written to the proper judge/court with jurisdiction where the offense occurred. 
543.007 – Notice to Appear; Commercial Vehicle or License 
Certain language must be included on a citation issued to a person operating a commercial motor 
vehicle or the holder of a commercial driver’s license or learner’s permit.  This language warns of 
disqualification for a certain number of serious traffic violations within specified timeframes.  
• Reference 522.003(25) – Definition of “Serious Traffic Violation”  
• Reference 522.081(a) – Disqualification of Driver for Serious Traffic Violations 
543.008 – Violation by Officer 
A violation by an officer of a provision of Sections 543.003-543.007 is misconduct in office and the 
officer is subject to removal from the officer's position. 
543.009 – Compliance with or Violation of Promise to Appear 
This section allows a violator to comply with their promise to appear by having a lawyer appear in their 
place. 
If a person willfully violates a written promise to appear they are committing a misdemeanor. 
Note: The CCP also allows a person to comply via mail – Reference Code of Criminal Procedure Ch. 27 
543.010 – Specifications of Speeding Charge 
The citation/notice to appear on a charge of speeding must specify: 
1) the maximum or minimum speed limit applicable; and 
2) the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 89 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 3.4 – CHAPTER 544 - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS 
BPOC Objective 22.8 – Discuss traffic signs, signals, and markings. 
544.001 – Adoption of Sign Manual for State Highways   
This section directs TXDOT to adopt a uniform traffic control manual - the Texas Manual on Uniform 
Traffic Control Devices.  It is a traffic engineering manual that details information about many traffic 
control devices not specifically described in the TRC.  The TMUTCD must be utilized and understood in 
order to take proper enforcement action regarding traffic control devices that are not detailed in the 
TRC. 
Resource – Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
544.004 – Compliance with Traffic-Control Device 
Drivers are required to comply with official traffic control devices.   
Before taking enforcement action, officers should ensure that the device in question meets the 
definition of an official traffic control device and that the device is regulatory in nature (has a specific 
obligation for compliance). 
Reference 541.304 – official traffic control device – a sign, signal, marking, or device that is:  (A) 
consistent with this subtitle; (B) placed or erected by a public body or officer having jurisdiction; 
and (C) used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic.  
If a traffic control device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant 
person it cannot be enforced.  
Apply It: 
The red car makes a U-turn in a location 
where a sign indicates a U-turn should not 
be made. 
The TRC does not discuss this sign. 
The TMUTCD describes this as sign R3-4, a 
“No U-Turn” sign in Table 2B-4, Movement 
Prohibition Signs. 
The TMUTCD states “Where specific 
movements are prohibited, Movement 
Prohibition signs shall be installed.” 
Has the red vehicle disregarded a 
regulatory official traffic control device? 
YES               
 NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 90 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
544.005 – Interference with Traffic Control Device or Railroad Sign or Signal 
It is an offense to alter, injure, knock down, or remove an official traffic-control device or a railroad 
sign or signal.   
It is also an offense to alter or remove the inscription or insignia or any other part of an official traffic 
control device or railroad sign or signal. 
544.006 – Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals, or Markings 
It is a violation to place, maintain, or display on or in view of a highway an unauthorized sign, signal 
marking, or device that imitates or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal 
or that attempts to direct the movement of traffic.  
It is a violation to hide from view or hinder the effectiveness of an official traffic control device or 
railroad sign or signal. 
It is a violation to maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign within 1,000 feet of an intersection 
except under a permit issued by the Texas Transportation Commission.  
544.007 – Traffic Control Signals in General 
This section governs traffic control signals (red, yellow, and green lights). 
Drivers have specific obligations depending on the color of signal they are facing: 
(b) Circular green signal – vehicle may proceed after yielding ROW to other vehicles and pedestrians 
lawfully in the intersection or adjacent crosswalk when the green signal is exhibited.  
(c) Green arrow – vehicle may enter the intersection in the direction indicated, however must still yield 
ROW to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully in the intersection or adjacent crosswalk when the green 
signal is exhibited.  
(d) Steady red signal – vehicle must stop at one of two places: 
1)  a clearly marked stop line; or 
2)  in the absence of a clearly marked stop line, before entering the crosswalk.  
After stopping, a vehicle may turn right on a steady red signal after yielding ROW.  A vehicle may also 
turn left after stopping if both roadways are one way roadways. 
Note:  TXDOT or a local authority may prohibit a turn by a vehicle facing a steady red signal by 
posting a sign indicating the turn is prohibited (described in subsection f). 
(e) Steady yellow signal – the vehicle is warned by that movement authorized by a green signal is being 
terminated or a red signal is to be given. 
(g) Signal at place other than intersection – if a traffic control signal is placed in a location other than at 
an intersection and a clearly marked stop line is not provided, the stop for a red signal is required to be 
made at the signal.  
(i) Signal present but not displaying an indication – if a traffic control signal does not display an 
indication in any of the signal heads (i.e. the signal is not working due to power loss or some other 
problem), traffic is required to treat the signal as if it were a stop sign.  The only exceptions are for 
pedestrian hybrid beacons and freeway entrance ramp control signals. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 91 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Pedestrian hybrid beacon – no stop required if no signal is displayed. 
Freeway entrance ramp control signal – no stop required if no signal is displayed. 
544.008 – Flashing Signals 
Vehicles approaching a flashing red signal must stop at one of three places: 
1) Clearly marked stop line – if one exists, this is where the stop must be made. 
2) Before entering a crosswalk – if a stop line is not present. 
3) At a place nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver can see – if there is no stop line or 
crosswalk. 
After stopping, the vehicle may proceed subject to the rules of right-of-way applicable to stopping at a 
stop sign. 
Vehicles approaching a flashing yellow signal should proceed with caution. 
544.009 – Lane-Direction-Control Signals  
It is Illegal to travel in or merge into a lane with a red signal 
displayed in a lane-direction-control signal.  These signs are 
used to warn traffic of lane closures on controlled access 
highways and also to contra-flow traffic in areas of 
temporary congestion (i.e. around stadiums after sporting 
events).  
544.010 – Stop Signs and Yield Signs 
Traffic is required to stop at one of three specific locations for stop signs (or for yield signs, but only 
when necessary to comply with the obligation to yield): 
(1) At a clearly marked stop line 
(2) Before entering the crosswalk (if a stop line is not present) 
(3) At a place nearest the intersecting roadway the driver can see (if neither a stop line nor a 
crosswalk is present). 
The TMUTCD clarifies where a stop should be made in relation to a stop line: Stop lines should be used to 
indicate the point behind which vehicles are required to stop.  (TMUTCD Sec. 3B.16.01) A violation for 
failing to stop at the designated point occurs when a vehicle stops with any part of the vehicle beyond a 
clearly marked stop line. 
Note: There is NEVER a requirement to make the stop “at the stop sign”.  If there is no stop line or 
crosswalk, the vehicle may drive past the stop sign and stop at the place nearest the intersection where 
the operator can see the approaching traffic. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 92 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
544.011 – Lane Use Signs 
This section requires specific language for signs where there are multiple lanes 
moving in one direction and TXDOT or a local authority desires to direct slower 
moving traffic to travel in a lane other than the farthest left lane.  These signs 
should read “Left Lane for Passing Only”.  
TXDOT generally places “Left Lane for Passing Only” signs near speed limit signs so 
that they are placed at regular intervals. 
Signs must be in place to enforce “Left Lane for Passing Only”. 
Case Law – Abney vs. State, Court of Criminal Appeals, 394 S.W.3d 542 – examined “Left Lane for 
Passing Only” sign placement.  Held that a vehicle traveling in the left lane approximately 15 miles past 
the “Left Lane for Passing Only Sign” should not be stopped.  Stated there was no “bright line” rule for 
how frequently regulatory signs were placed, however the court determined it was important to 
establish how frequently signs were placed and whether or not the violator drove past a sign within a 
reasonable proximity to where an officer is alleging a violation. 
MODULE 3 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
1. A person “steering” a vehicle being towed with a tow chain is the operator of that vehicle.   
a. True                                                                                                                          
b. False 
2. Which of the following is not an authorized emergency vehicle?        
a. A police vehicle on routine patrol 
b. A tissue bank vehicle making an emergency delivery to the hospital 
c. A private vehicle of a volunteer firefighter returning from a fire 
d. A private ambulance parked at Denny’s while the paramedics are eating 
3. A physician responding to an emergency in his personal vehicle would be considered to be operating 
an authorized emergency vehicle.                                                          
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 93 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
4.  A bus is a motor vehicle designed to transport how many people?  _________________________ 
5. When a charter bus company is hired by a school to take school children on a field trip, that bus is 
considered to be a school bus. 
a. True                                                                                   
b. False 
6. A “light truck” means a truck with a manufacturer’s rated carrying capacity of _________ pounds or 
less.  
7. A bucket loader operated on the highway meets the definition of ______________________________.  
8. What are the two distinct features of a motorcycle? 
Equipped with a ______________________                                       
Not more than _______________________ in contact with the ground 
9. A vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle to transport persons or property and constructed so 
that no part of the vehicle’s weight and load rests on the motor vehicle is the definition of a:   
a. Trailer 
b. Semi-trailer                                                                                          
c. Pole trailer 
d. All of the above 
10. A/an __________________________________ is a vehicle that is designed and adapted for use as a 
farm implement, machinery, or tool for tilling the soil. 
11. Which of the following is not considered “traffic”? 
a. A person riding a donkey                                                                  
b. A person operating a motorized mobility device 
c. A person walking on the sidewalk 
d. Goats being herded by a goat herder 
e. A wild deer 
12. The junction of a private drive with a highway does not constitute an intersection. 
a.  True                                                                                                 
b.  False 
13. In order to be considered an “Official Traffic Control Device”, the device must be placed by:   
a. A police officer 
b. A TXDOT employee                                                 
c. A public body or officer having jurisdiction 
d. The owner of a parking lot 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 94 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Label the traffic areas in the corresponding blanks below: 
15
 14
 16
 14.  __________________________________________ 
15.  __________________________________________ 
16.  __________________________________________ 
17. When does “Daytime” end?   ______________________________________________________ 
18. When does “Nighttime” end? ______________________________________________________ 
19. A vehicle does not meet the definition of “stand” if it halts temporarily to load or unload passengers. 
a. True 
b. False                                                                                              
20.  A vehicle only meets the definition of “park” if the transmission is placed in the park position.   
a. True 
b. False        
BPOC Student Manual - Page 95 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
21. A provision of this subtitle (Subtitle C) relating to the operation of a vehicle applies only to the 
operation of a vehicle on a highway unless the provision specifically applies to a different place.   
a. True 
b. False         
22. Unless otherwise specified, the level of offense for a violation of Subtitle C in the Transportation Code 
is a _____________________.                                            
23. Unless otherwise specified, the fine for an offense of Subtitle C in the Transportation Code is 
___________ to __________.            
24. It is a violation to willfully fail or refuse to comply with a lawful order or direction of:  
a. A police officer        
b. A trained school crossing guard at a school crosswalk                 
c. An escort flagger directing or controlling the flow of traffic according to a permit 
d. All of the Above 
25. Any peace officer is authorized to arrest, without a warrant, any person found committing a violation 
of Subtitle C, Texas Transportation Code. 
a. True        
b. False 
26. List the three offenses where an officer is required to issue a notice to appear:     
1. ____________________________________                   
2. ____________________________________ 
3. ____________________________________ 
27. On a citation, an officer must list a court date exactly 10 days after the date of the violation.   
a. True 
b. False        
28. A peace officer who violates the provisions of Chapter 543.003-543.007:  
a. Commits misconduct and is subject to removal from the officer’s position 
b. Commits misconduct and is subject to a written reprimand 
c. Commits misconduct and is subject to civil liability 
d. Does not commit misconduct unless the officer acted knowingly or intentionally 
29. To find information on a traffic control device not described in the Texas Transportation Code, 
officers should utilize:  
a. Administrative Code                                                                                               
b. Case Law 
c. Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
d. The Google 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 96 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
30. Enforcement action may be taken against an operator for failing to stop even when the stop sign 
is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. 
e. True 
a. False  
31. An operator of a vehicle facing a traffic control signal that does not display an indication in any 
of the signal heads shall: 
a. Stop as if there is a stop sign 
b. Slow down and yield as if there is a yield sign 
c. Proceed with caution as if there is a flashing yellow signal 
d. Continue without stopping because the traffic control device is not in proper working 
condition 
32. A flashing red traffic light and a stop sign require the same obedience.     
a. True 
b. False 
33. List the three places an operator may be required to stop for a stop sign:     
1. _______________________________________________        
2. _______________________________________________ 
3. _______________________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 97 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 4 – TRC CHAPTER 545 
SECTION 4.1 – CHAPTER 545 - OPERATION AND MOVEMENT OF VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.9 – Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter B, TC. 
545.001 – Definitions 
1) On-Track Equipment – any car, rolling stock, equipment, or other device that, alone or coupled 
to another device, is operated on a railroad track.  On-track equipment is given the ROW at 
railroad crossings as if the equipment were a train (TRC 545.251). 
2) Pass or Passing – used in reference to a vehicle means: to overtake and proceed past another 
vehicle moving in the same direction as the passing vehicle; and return to the original lane of 
travel. The term also means to attempt that maneuver even if the pass is not completed. 
3) School Bus – when used in the context of Chapter 545, “School Bus” also means a multifunction 
school activity bus. 
545.002 – Operator 
The term “operator” refers to the person operating the vehicle, but also includes references to the 
vehicle if the reference imposes a duty or provides a limitation on the movement or other operation of 
that vehicle.  Many sections in Chapter 545 begin with the words “An operator…” and then describes a 
prohibited or required action for the vehicle. 
Reference 541.001(1-a) – operator – a person who drives or has physical control of a vehicle. 
545.051 – Driving on Right Side of Roadway 
This establishes the general flow of traffic in Texas.  Traffic is required to travel on the right half of the 
roadway unless: 
1)  passing another vehicle 
2)  safely going around an obstruction 
3)  traveling on a roadway divided into three marked lanes, or  
4)  traveling on a one way roadway 
Traveling on the left side of the roadway outside of these situations constitutes a violation for Wrong 
Side Road – Not Passing. 
(b)  Slower traffic is required to keep in the right hand lane in preference to faster moving vehicles.  In 
order for this offense to take place, there must be other traffic on the highway traveling faster. There 
are no requirements for signs to be posted to enforce this violation.  The offense for a violation of this 
subsection is Slower Vehicle Fail to Keep Right. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 98 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 99 
(c)  Operators may only drive left of the center line of a two-way roadway with 4 or more lanes in one of 
the following circumstances: 
1)  if authorized to do so by law (i.e. a center left turn only lane, reversible lanes, etc.) 
2)  to safely go around an obstruction, or  
3)  while turning left 
 
Apply It: 
 
 
This vehicle is traveling 55 MPH in a 70 MPH 
zone.  Is the driver committing the violation of 
Slower Vehicle Fail to Keep Right? 
 
                    YES                         NO 
 
Why or why not? 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
 
 
The blue vehicle is traveling 55 MPH in a 70 
MPH zone next to the green vehicle.  Is the 
driver committing the violation of Slower 
Vehicle Fail to Keep Right? 
 
                 YES                         NO 
 
Why or why not? 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
 
 
The blue vehicle is traveling 55 MPH in the left 
lane.  The green vehicle is traveling 70 MPH.  Is 
the driver or the blue vehicle committing the 
violation of Slower Vehicle Fail to Keep Right? 
 
                 YES                         NO 
 
 
 
 
The blue vehicle is all alone on the roadway 
traveling in the left lane.  A “Left Lane for 
Passing Only” sign is posted. 
Is the blue vehicle committing a violation for 
Slower Vehicle Fail to Keep Right? 
YES                     
    NO 
Is the blue vehicle committing a violation for 
Drove in Left Lane Not Passing? 
YES                          
545.052 – Driving Past Vehicle Moving in Opposite Direction 
NO 
When meeting another vehicle on a roadway wide enough for just one vehicle in each direction, 
operators must yield ½ of the roadway to traffic moving in the opposite direction.  If yielding ½ of the 
roadway is not possible due to roadway conditions or vehicle size, the vehicle must yield “as much of the 
roadway as possible.” 
545.053 – Passing to the Left; Return; Being Passed 
(a) Describes the requirements for the passing vehicle – must pass to the left at a “safe distance” and 
may not move back to the right until safely clear of the passed vehicle.  Arrest titles from this subsection 
are Failed to Pass to the Left Safely and Cut in After Pass.  
(b) Operators of vehicles being passed must, on audible signal, stay to the right and are not permitted 
to accelerate until passed.  “Audible signal” is not defined, however this signal must be present in order 
for an offense to take place by the passed vehicle. The most likely audible signal would be the passing 
vehicle sounding the horn. 
545.054 – Passing to the Left; Safe Distance 
Passing to the left is only permitted in legal passing zones and only when it can be done safely.  The 
passing vehicle may not interfere with the operation of the passed vehicle or oncoming traffic and must 
move back to the right before coming within 200’ of oncoming vehicles. 
If a lane of opposing traffic is not used during the pass, the passing vehicle must simply return to the 
right lane as soon as practicable. 
Word Association:  Passing to the Left    return before 200 feet of oncoming vehicle 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 100 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.055 – Passing to the Left; Passing Zones 
This section is the first of five times a vehicle is not permitted to be left of the center of the roadway 
(the other four times are described in 545.056, see next section).   
This section refers to a “sign or marking” that prohibits being left of center.  This is a solid 
yellow line, also frequently called a “no passing zone”.  It may also be marked by signs 
(pictured right).  
Unless a vehicle is making a left turn at an intersection or into a private drive or alley, 
traveling left of the no passing zone marking is prohibited. 
Apply it: 
The blue truck began its pass in a legal passing 
zone but has not quite returned to the right side 
of the roadway when it reaches the solid yellow 
line.  Is this a violation for Disregard No Passing 
Zone?          
YES                       
    NO 
545.056 – Driving to Left of Center 
A vehicle is not permitted to drive on the left side of the roadway in a no passing zone, as stated in 
545.055 (previous section in this document).  This section provides four additional times/locations 
where it is illegal to drive on the left side of the roadway.  These restrictions do not apply when a 
vehicle is traveling on a one-way roadway or making a left turn.  
A vehicle may not drive on the left side of the roadway: 
1) Approaching within 100 feet of an intersection/RR grade crossing in a municipality (in city limits) 
2)  Approaching within 100 feet of an intersection/RR grade crossing outside a municipality when 
marked according to 545.055 (no passing zone).  NOTE:  The term “shown by a sign or marking” is 
not referring to a road name sign or other marking.  This is a specific reference to a No Passing Zone 
sign or marking. 
3)  Approaching within 100 feet of a bridge, viaduct or tunnel (even if the bridge, viaduct, or tunnel is 
marked as a passing zone). 
4)  While awaiting access at a ferry crossing.   
Apply It: 
Is this a legal pass? 
YES                  
 NO                   
Explain your answer: 
  IT DEPENDS 
____________________________________ 
____________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 101 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.057 – Passing to the Right 
This section addresses passing on the right when the passing vehicle is not utilizing an improved 
shoulder – passing on the improved (paved) shoulder is governed by 545.058 (see next section).  
Passing on the right is only permitted when it can be done safely, the vehicle being passed is making a 
left turn, and the operator of the passing vehicle has unobstructed pavement to the right of the passed 
vehicle on which to travel.  Passing to the right is never permitted if the passing vehicle leaves 
pavement.  
DPS Arrest Titles: 
Failed to Pass to Right Safely 
Illegal Pass on Right 
Examples: 
Legal pass – front vehicle turning left.   
Illegal pass – front vehicle not turning left. 
Illegal pass – passing vehicle leaves pavement. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 102 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.058 – Driving on Improved Shoulder 
Reference 541.302(6) – Definition of improved shoulder (a paved shoulder) 
RIGHT IMPROVED SHOULDER 
Driving on the improved shoulder to the right of the roadway is only permitted if it is done safely and 
when necessary to accomplish one of the following seven exceptions: 
(1) To stop, stand or park. 
(2) To accelerate before entering the main traveled traffic lane. 
(3) To decelerate before making a right turn. 
(4) To pass another vehicle that is slowing or stopped on the main traveled portion of the highway, 
disabled, or preparing to make a left turn.  (Note:  there are three separate circumstances described 
here – passing a vehicle that is slowing or stopped, passing vehicle that is disabled, and passing a 
vehicle that is preparing to make a left turn). 
(5) To allow another vehicle traveling faster to pass. 
(6) As permitted or required by an official traffic control device. 
(7) To avoid a collision. 
These seven times can be remembered using the acronym SAD PAPA. 
S – Stop, stand, or park 
A – Accelerate before entering 
D – Decelerate before turning 
P – Pass a vehicle slowing, stopped, or disabled in main lane 
A – Allow faster moving vehicle to pass 
P – Permitted or required by official traffic control device 
A – Avoid a collision 
LEFT IMPROVED SHOULDER ON CONTROLLED ACCESS/LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY 
Driving on the improved shoulder to the left of the roadway is only permitted in one of the following 
three times: 
(1) To slow or stop when the vehicle is disabled and traffic or other circumstances prohibit the safe 
movement to the right shoulder. 
(2) As permitted or required by an official traffic control device 
(3) To avoid a collision 
These three times can be remembered using the acronym SPA. 
S – Slow or stop when disabled 
P – Permitted or required by an official traffic control device. 
A – Avoid a collision 
The prohibitions on driving on the improved shoulder do not apply to: 
(1)  authorized emergency vehicles responding to calls 
(2)  police patrols 
(3)  bicycles 
(4)  slow moving vehicles as defined by 547.001 (vehicle designed for maximum speed of 25 MPH or 
vehicle pulled by an animal). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 103 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Case Law – Lothrop v. State, Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, PD-1489-11:  (a)(4) “To pass another 
vehicle that is slowing or stopped” was very broadly interpreted.  Also discussed the “when necessary” 
language in (a) and concluded that it meant “when necessary” to accomplish one of the exceptions. 
Lothrop v. State: 
The red truck’s pass on the right improved shoulder 
was not illegal because it was passing a vehicle that 
was “slowing” on the main traveled portion of the 
roadway and the pass was covered under 
545.058(a)(4). 
545.059 – One-Way Roadways and Rotary Traffic Island 
One-way roadways are designated by signs and markings.  It is a violation to drive 
the wrong way on a one-way roadway. 
The direction of traffic flow around a rotary traffic 
island (roundabout) is to the right.  The vehicle in this 
diagram is committing the violation of Drive to Left of 
Rotary Traffic Island. 
545.060 – Driving on Roadway Laned for Traffic 
These offenses can only be committed on a “roadway divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for 
traffic”.  
(a)  There are two requirements for driving on a roadway divided into two or more clearly marked lanes 
for traffic:  
1) Operators must drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane (Violation – Fail to Drive 
in Single Lane), and  
2) Operators may not move from the lane unless that movement can be made safely (Violation 
Changed Lanes When Unsafe). 
Case Law – Hardin v. State, Court of Criminal Appeals  – Per the CCA, merely leaving a lane momentarily 
should not be considered to be a “failed to drive in a single lane” offense unless the movement is made 
in an unsafe manner.  In the Hardin case, an officer stopped a vehicle after observing its right side tires 
momentarily cross over a lane line into the adjacent lane before returning to the original lane.  There 
was no evidence that this movement was made in an unsafe manner.  The CCA closely examined the 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 104 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
manner in which 545.060(a) is constructed and concluded that the use of “and” between (a)(1) and 
(a)(2) essentially binds the two provisions together and therefore both must be violated before an 
offense of this section exists. 
What about the Community Caretaker Doctrine?   
The US Supreme Court recognizes that police officers, as part of their duty to "serve and protect," can 
stop and assist an individual whom a reasonable person, after considering the totality of the 
circumstances, would believe is in need of help.  Resource – DPS Legal Bulletin (July 2002, Issue 88), 
Community Caretaker  – this Legal bulletin discusses the process of stopping a vehicle that has not 
committed a traffic violation due to an officer’s concern that the driver or others may be in danger.  A 
stop can be made to check on the driver under the Community Caretaker doctrine, but only if an officer 
can articulate a number of factors as described by the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals in Wright v. Texas 
and Corbin v. Texas decisions.   
These court cases essentially set up a four-part test for a Community Caretaker stop:  
1) What is the level of distress exhibited? 
2) Is the individual in a location that is isolated where help is not readily available?   
3) Is the individual alone, or are they with other people who could render assistance if needed? 
4) What is the extent to which the individual presents a danger to himself or others if not assisted? 
(b)  If a roadway is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, an operator 
on the roadway may not drive in the center lane except when doing certain things: 
(1) if passing another vehicle and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance 
(2) in preparing to make a left turn;  or 
(3) where the center lane is designated by an official traffic-control device for movement in the 
direction in which the operator is moving. 
This center lane can be used for passing or turning 
left in either direction. 
This center lane can only be used for turning 
left.  Passing in the center lane is prohibited by 
the Left Turn Only designation.  Arrest title 
Drive in Two-Way Left Turn Lane – Not Turning 
Left. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 105 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
This center lane can only be used in the direction 
designated by the official traffic-control device 
(green arrow above the lane). 
(c)  An official traffic-control device may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated 
lane or designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction (Slower Traffic Keep Right 
signs). 
(d)  An official traffic-control devices prohibiting the changing of lanes on a section of roadway may be 
installed.   This is accomplished with solid double white lines.  Crossing solid double white lines is 
prohibited (Disregard No Lane Change Device).      
This pavement marking is depicted in 
Figure 3B-12 of the Texas Manual on 
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.  The 
TMUTCD states, “Where crossing the 
lane line markings is prohibited, the lane 
line markings shall consist of a solid 
double white line.” 
545.0605 - Operation of Motorcycles on Roadway Laned for Traffic   (new law, effective 9/1/23) 
(1) This section specifies that the operator of a motorcycle is entitled to full use of a lane and a motor 
vehicle may not be driven in a manner that deprives a motorcycle of the full use of a lane (i.e. crowding 
into lane space next to a motorcycle).  This would not apply to motorcycles riding two abreast as 
permitted by this section. 
(2) This section specifically allows motorcycles to ride two 
abreast in a single lane but prohibits riding more than two 
abreast. 
Illegal 
Legal 
(3) This section also specifically prohibits the practice commonly known 
as “lane splitting” where a motorcycle operates between lanes of traffic 
moving in the same direction or passes a motor vehicle while in the 
same lane as the vehicle being passed. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 106 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.061 – Driving on Multiple-Lane Roadway 
On a roadway with three or more lanes, when two vehicles are attempting to enter the same lane from 
different directions the vehicle attempting to enter the lane from the right must yield to the vehicle 
attempting to enter the lane from the left when changing lanes. 
Apply It:  
545.062 – Following Distance 
These two vehicles collide while both 
attempting to change lanes into the 
middle lane. 
Circle the vehicle that has right-of
way. 
(a) A vehicle following another vehicle in the same direction must maintain clear assured distance so as 
not to collide with the vehicle ahead. Factors such as vehicle speed, traffic and roadway conditions must 
all be considered. 
(b) and (c) An operator of a truck or a motor vehicle drawing another vehicle is required to leave enough 
space between itself and another truck or motor vehicle drawing a vehicle so that another vehicle 
attempting to pass has sufficient space to safely pass one at a time.  This same concept applies to 
vehicles being operated in a caravan even if the vehicles are not towing other vehicles.  This does not 
apply to vehicles being operated in a funeral procession. 
545.063 – Driving on Divided Highway 
(a) When driving on a divided highway, operators shall drive on the right roadway. 
(b) A dividing space, physical barrier, or section constructed to impeded traffic should not be crossed 
except through an opening or at an established crossover.    
545.064 – Restricted Access 
It is an offense to enter or leave a controlled access roadway at any place not designed to be an 
entrance or exit.  This typically occurs when a vehicle cuts across a grassy area to enter or leave a 
controlled access highway. 
Controlled access roadways are defined in 541.302(8). 
545.0651 – Restriction on Use of Highway 
Note this section has a unique definition of “highway” – a public highway that is controlled access and 
has a minimum of three travel lanes in each direction.  This provision allows the restriction of certain 
vehicles in certain lanes.  An example would be a “NO TRUCKS LEFT LANE" sign.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 107 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.066 – Passing a School Bus 
(a) When a school bus is operating its visual signals (flashing red lights) vehicles approaching that bus 
from either direction must stop before reaching the school bus.  Stopped vehicles may not proceed until 
one of the following takes place: 
(1) The bus resumes motion 
(2) The bus driver signals it is ok to move, or 
(3) The flashing red light is no longer flashing 
(b) If the bus is on a divided highway, only the traffic on that side of the highway must stop.  A center 
turn lane does not constitute a divider so both sides are required to stop. 
(c) This violation carries higher than normal fine amounts and an enhancement for causing SBI. 
• 1st offense – $500 - $1250  
• 2nd or subsequent offense within 5 years – $1,000 - $2,000 
• If the violation causes serious bodily injury – Class A Misdemeanor 
• If the person has been previously convicted of causing SBI under this section – State Jail Felony 
After a second or subsequent conviction of this offense, the court may order that the violator’s driver’s 
license be suspended for up to six months. 
BPOC Objective 22.10 – Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter C, TC. 
545.101 – Turning at Intersections 
Reference 541.303 – definition of intersection – the common area at the junction of two highways, other 
than the junction of an alley and a highway. 
This section specifically addresses the legal requirements for turning at an intersection.  These 
regulations do not apply when turning at places other than intersections such as turning into/from 
private drives, private roads, or parking lots.  These areas do not constitute “intersections” because they 
are not the junction of two highways. 
Turning Right at an Intersection 
(a) To make a right turn at an intersection, the operator must make the approach and the turn as closely 
as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
Word Association:  Right Turn   Intersection   As close as practicable to right edge of roadway 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 108 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 109 
Apply It: 
 
For each turn, list “legal” or 
“illegal” based on 545.101. 
 
#1 ______________________ 
 
#2 ______________________ 
 
#3 ______________________ 
 
#4 ______________________ 
 
 
 
 
Turning Left at an Intersection 
(b) To make a left turn at an intersection, the operator must approach the turn in the left-most lane 
available.  After entering the intersection, the operator must turn left so as to arrive in a lane for which 
travel in the desired direction is authorized. 
Word Association:  Left Turn   Intersection   Approach in left-most lane  end in any lane lawfully available 
 
Apply It: 
For each turn, list “legal” or 
“illegal” based on 545.101. 
 
#1 ______________________ 
 
#2 ______________________ 
 
#3 ______________________ 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 4 
3 
2 
#1 ______________________ 
#2 ______________________ 
#3 ______________________ 
1 
(c) A left turn should be made in the portion of the 
intersection to left of the center.  This helps avoid conflict 
with oncoming traffic that may also be attempting to turn 
left.  
Center of intersection 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 110 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Turning Left – One Way Roadways 
(d) To turn left at an intersection from a one-way roadway onto another one-way roadway, the operator 
of a vehicle shall make the turn as closely as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
Legal Turn 
Turn Marks at Intersection 
(e) Official Traffic Control Devices may be placed at 
intersections to require a course of turning different than that 
normally prescribed by 545.101.  It is an offense to turn in a 
manner or direction that does not comply with the turn marks 
at an intersection (DPS Arrest Title – Disregard Turn Marks at 
Intersection). 
Illegal Turn – not as closely 
as practicable to left edge 
of the roadway (one way to 
one way). 
545.102 – Turning on Curve or Crest of Grade   
U-turns are permissible in Texas, however the U-turn must not be made near a curve or the crest of a 
grade if visibility is reduced to below 500 feet for a vehicle approaching from either direction. 
Some intersections have traffic control devices (signs) that prohibit U-turns.  If the sign is not present, 
the U-turn is legal as long as the visibility requirements are met. 
Word Association:  U-Turn   visibility at least 500 feet   
545.103 – Safely Turning 
This statute requires the following three movements to be made safely: 
• Turning right or left 
• Turning from a direct course 
• Moving right or left on the roadway  
DPS Arrest Titles: 
Turned When Unsafe 
Unsafe Movement Right or Left on Roadway 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 111 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.104 – Signaling Turns; Use of Turn Signals 
The use of a turn signal is required in the following three circumstances: 
(1) To indicate the intent to turn right or left (must be signaled for the last 100 feet of movement). 
(2) To signal the intent to change lanes (no distance requirement, but should be signaled prior to 
crossing the lane lines). 
(3) To signal the intent to start from a parked position on the highway. 
Case law – Mahaffey v. State, 364 S.W.3d 908 –  Court of Criminal Appeals clarified that a turn means to 
alter from a direct course.  A vehicle following a curve in the roadway is not considered to be “turning” 
for signaling requirement purposes.  Also, a vehicle merging into a lane from a lane that is ending is not 
required to signal as long as it does not cross lane lines.  It is simply following the direct course of its 
lane.  
Mahaffey v. State – no signal 
required in this situation. 
Case Law – Speck v. State, 564 S.W.3d 497– Court of Criminal Appeals clarified that a vehicle must signal 
when exiting a freeway because it is altering from the direct course of the lane it is in by taking the exit 
ramp. 
Speck v. State – signal 
required in this 
situation. 
Case Law – Aviles v. State, 26 S.W.3d 696  – clarified that a vehicle may change multiple lanes at once 
without stopping as long as the intent is signaled. 
Case Law – Wehring v. State, 276 S.W.3d 666 – a vehicle must signal a turn even when turning at an 
intersection from a “turn only” lane. 
(c)  An operator may not light the turn signal on only one side of a parked or disabled vehicle and may 
not use the turn signal as a “do pass” signal to a vehicle approaching from the rear (DPS Arrest Title – 
Improper Use of Turn Indicator). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 112 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.105 – Signaling Stops 
Operators must give a stop signal before stopping.  This is usually automatically accomplished when the 
stop lamps come on as the operator applies the brakes. 
545.106 – Signals by Hand or Arm or by Signal Lamps 
545.107 – Method of Giving Hand and Arm Signals 
Smaller vehicles may accomplish the requirement to signal stops and turns by using a hand signal in lieu 
of a signal lamp.   
The vehicle must be of such a size that the distance from the top of the steering post to the left outside 
limit of the body, cab, or load of the motor vehicle is 2 feet or less.  Hand signals may also be used if the 
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load is 14 feet or 
less.  If the vehicle is larger than these dimensions, the signal must be given by lighted lamps (turn signal 
lamps and brake lamps). 
Remember: If a vehicle’s signal lamps are not working and the driver signals by hand they could not be 
charged with failing to signal the stop or turn, however they could still be charged with the defective 
turn or stop lamps, as these lamps are required equipment for most vehicles. 
BPOC Objective 22.11 – Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter D, TC. 
545.151 – Vehicle approaching or Entering Intersection 
Vehicles approaching and utilizing intersections must obey traffic control signals that establish right-of
way at the intersection.  If a signal is present but not displaying an indication, vehicles must stop and 
yield ROW (i.e. treat it like a stop sign – see 544.007(i)) 
If traffic control is not present (open intersection), the following rules govern right-of-way: 
(b) Vehicles on smaller roads stop and yield the right-of-way to traffic on larger roads and undivided 
highways stop and yield ROW to divided highways.  
(c) A vehicle on an unpaved road intersecting a paved road must stop and yield the right-of-way to 
traffic on the paved road.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 113 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(d) If roads are of equal size, an operator must stop and yield the right-of-way to a vehicle approaching 
from the immediate right if the vehicle is in hazardous proximity. 
This vehicle has the ROW 
(e) At an uncontrolled T-intersection, the vehicle 
on the roadway terminating must stop and yield 
the right-of-way to a vehicle on the through 
roadway.  
This vehicle has the ROW 
If there are no other vehicles around, is a vehicle still required to stop at an open intersection? 
Yes, in many circumstances.  545.151 requires specific vehicles to stop first and then yield ROW if there 
is another vehicle approaching (Offense – Fail to Stop as Required at Open Intersection). 
Violation 
There is no other traffic around and this vehicle does not stop before 
traveling through this open intersection. This is a violation of 
545.151(d). This subsection requires a vehicle approaching an open 
intersection in this circumstnace to stop. After stopping, the vehicle 
must yield ROW to another vehicle approaching from the right. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 114 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Violation 
No Violation 
545.152 – Vehicle Turning Left 
There is no other traffic around and this vehicle does not stop before 
traveling through this open intersection. This is a violation of 
545.151(e) because this vehicle is on a roadway that terminates at the 
intersection. 
This vehicle is not required to stop at this open intersection because it 
is on the roadway that does not terminate at the intersection. 
545.151(e) only requires the vehicle on the terminating roadway to 
stop. 
A vehicle turning left at an intersection or into an alley/private road/private drive must yield the right
of-way to traffic approaching from the opposite direction.  
Note:  Before charging a violator with this offense, the following two questions should be considered: 
1) Where was the vehicle turning?   
The vehicle must be turning at an intersection or INTO an alley/private road/private drive. 
2) What did the vehicle fail to yield ROW to?   
It must be a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
Apply It: 
In each diagram below, has the offense of Failed to Yield ROW – Turning Left occurred? 
YES           
 NO 
YES           
 NO 
YES           
 NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 115 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.153 – Vehicle Entering Stop or Yield Intersection 
Stop signs and yield signs designate right-of-way when placed at an intersection. After stopping for a 
stop sign or slowing to a reasonable peed at a yield, a vehicle must yield the right-of-way to a vehicle 
that has entered the intersection from another highway or that is approaching so closely as to be an 
immediate hazard to the operator's movement in or across the intersection. 
DPS Enforcement Guidance – THP Manual Chapter 5 – a violator disregarding a stop sign at a speed 
faster than a walk should be considered to have committed a clear-cut and substantial violation.  
Violators who disregard a stop sign at walking speed or less should generally be issued a written warning 
rather than a citation.  (Note: this policy is applicable to DPS officers only.  Other law enforcement 
officers should be guided by their own agency’s policy). 
545.154 – Vehicle Entering or Leaving Limited-Access/Controlled-Access Highway 
This section only applies to vehicles traveling on the access/feeder road.  It is most applicable on 2-way 
feeder roads where a vehicle may cross a lane of traffic to take an entrance ramp or when exiting the 
highway onto the feeder road.  Traffic utilizing or attempting to utilize the ramp in either direction has 
the right-of-way over traffic driving on the feeder road.  This section does not govern ROW when a 
vehicle is merging onto a freeway from a ramp.  
Feeder road 
must yield ROW 
Feeder road 
must yield ROW 
545.155 – Vehicle Entering Highway from Private Road or Driveway 
must yield ROW 
Traffic attempting to enter a highway from a private road, driveway, or parking lot must yield the right
of-way to all traffic already using the highway to be entered.   
545.156 – Vehicle Approached by Authorized Emergency Vehicle 
Reference 541.201(1) – definition of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Required Equipment to Gain Right-of-Way: 
1) Most Authorized Emergency Vehicles – audible and visual signals (lights and siren)  
2) Medical Examiner Vehicles and Justice of the Peace Vehicles – flashing red or red and blue 
emergency lights  
3) Police Vehicles – audible or visual signals (only lights or only siren) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 116 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 117 
(a-1) On the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, medical examiner vehicle, or 
justice of the peace using the required signals, an operator must: 
1) yield the right-of-way; 
2) immediately pull as close as possible to the right edge of the roadway clear of any intersection; and 
3) stop and remain standing until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed. 
 
Reference 547.751 and 547.752 – emergency lights for Medical Examiner and Justice of the Peace 
Vehicles when responding to an inquest. 
(b)  Although emergency vehicles can gain the ROW using certain emergency equipment, they must still 
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
Apply It: 
Is the red vehicle required to yield ROW to 
the ambulance with emergency lights 
activated? 
                YES                               NO 
If no, why not? 
_____________________________________ 
_____________________________________ 
 
 
 
Is the red vehicle required to yield ROW to the 
police vehicle with emergency lights and siren 
activated? 
                YES                               NO 
If no, why not? 
_____________________________________ 
_____________________________________ 
 
Is the red pickup committing the violation of Failed to Yield 
ROW to an Emergency Vehicle? 
  YES                            NO 
If no, why not?  __________________________________ 
                             __________________________________ 
545.157 – Passing Certain Vehicles  
This is the “Move Over/Slow Down” law. 
(b) when passing a vehicle described in (a), an operator must either vacate the nearest lane or reduce 
speed to at least 20 miles per hour below the posted speed limit.   
IMPORTANT: a vehicle that can vacate the nearest lane but chooses to reduce speed instead has not 
violated this section.   
(a) Who is protected by this law?  
1) Stationary emergency vehicle using emergency lights.  
2) Stationary tow trucks using red flashing lights. 
3) TxDOT vehicles and highway construction and maintenance vehicles not separated from the 
roadway by a traffic channelizing device and using amber flashing lights (required).  May also be 
using blue flashing lights (permitted).  NOTE: this vehicle is not required to be stationary. 
4) Service vehicles operated by or for a utility and using amber flashing lights (required).  May also be 
using blue flashing lights (permitted).  NOTE: this vehicle is not required to be stationary. 
5) Stationary garbage trucks while collecting waste.  NOTE: There are no specific lighting requirements.   
6) Vehicles operated by or pursuant to a contract with a toll project entity using amber flashing lights 
(required).  May also be using blue flashing lights (permitted). 
(c)  There are several enhancements to this offense: 
• 1st offense – fine not less than $500 or more than $1,250. 
• 2nd or subsequent within 5 years – fine not less than $1,000 or more than $2,000 
• Offense results in Bodily Injury to another – Class A Misdemeanor 
• 2nd or subsequent Offense resulting in Bodily Injury to another – State Jail Felony 
BPOC Objective 22.12 – Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter F, TC. 
545.251 – Obedience to Signal Indicating Approach of Train   
Simply stated, vehicles must stop and yield to trains and other on-track equipment (special equipment 
operating on the railroad tracks).  The train always has the right-of-way.  A vehicle approaching a 
railroad crossing must stop if there is an indication that a train is approaching. 
An operator approaching a railroad grade crossing shall stop not closer than 15 feet or farther than 50 
feet from the nearest rail if any of the following are present: 
(1) a clearly visible railroad signal warns of the approach of a railroad train, 
(2) a crossing gate is lowered, or a flagger warns of the approach or passage of a train, 
(3) a railroad engine approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the highway crossing emits a 
signal audible from that distance and the engine is an immediate hazard because of its speed or 
proximity to the crossing, 
(4) an approaching railroad train is plainly visible to the operator and is in hazardous proximity to 
the crossing, or 
(5)  the operator is required to stop by other official traffic control devices or signals 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 118 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
An operator of a vehicle required to stop shall remain stopped until permitted to proceed and it is safe 
to proceed. 
Word Association:  Approaching Train   Stop 15 to 50 feet from nearest rail 
545.252 – All Vehicles to Stop at Certain Railroad Grade Crossings 
If TXDOT or a local authority deems a certain railroad grade crossing particularly dangerous, they may 
erect a stop sign requiring all drivers stop prior to crossing regardless of whether or not a train is 
approaching.  A vehicle that fails to stop for this sign commits a violation.   
545.253 – Buses to Stop at All RR Grade Crossings 
A motor bus carrying passengers for hire is required to stop 15-50 feet from the nearest rail, listen and 
look both directions while stopped, and proceed when it is safe to do so.  This is not required in a 
business or residence district (see definitions in 541.102). 
545.2535 – School Buses to Stop at All RR Grade Crossings 
School buses are required to stop 15-50 feet from the nearest rail, listen, look in both directions, and 
proceed when safe to do so. 
The requirement for school buses to stop at the railroad tracks does not apply to out of service tracks or 
industrial spur lines marked “Exempt”. 
545.254 – Vehicles Carrying Explosive Substances or Flammable Liquids 
Vehicles carrying explosive substances or flammable liquids (see definitions, 541.401(2) and (3)) shall 
reduce speed to 20mph before coming within 200 feet of the tracks, shall listen and look in both 
directions, and shall proceed only when safe to do so.  If crossing in a municipality, these vehicles are 
required to come to a stop before crossing railroad tracks. 
Important:  These requirements do not apply in a variety of circumstances, including at railroad 
crossings with flashing red lights that are not activated. 
545.256 – Emerging from an Alley, Driveway or Building 
An operator emerging from an alley, driveway, or building in a business or residential district shall stop 
before moving on a sidewalk or the area of a sidewalk that extends across the alley or driveway and 
must yield right-of-way to pedestrians on the sidewalk and traffic on the roadway to avoid a collision.   
Reference 541.102 – Definitions of business and residential districts 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 119 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Objective 22.13 – Given a driving situation, determine if a traffic law is violated as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter G, TC. 
IMPORTANT:  When determining the legality of a vehicle stopping, standing, or parking, you must first 
determine whether or not the vehicle is in a business or residence district because there are different 
rules outside these areas. 
Reference 541.102 – Definitions of business and residence districts 
545.301 – Stopping, Standing, Parking Outside Business or Residence District 
If a vehicle is NOT in a business or residence district, stopping, standing, or parking on the roadway is 
prohibited unless all of the following conditions are present: 
(1) Stopping, parking or leaving the vehicle off the roadway is not practical 
(2) A width of highway beside the vehicle is unobstructed and open for passage of vehicles, and 
(3) The stopped vehicle is in clear view for at least 200 feet 
If the stop could practically be made somewhere other than the roadway (i.e. on the shoulder, in a 
private drive, etc.) then the stop would be a violation of this section when made in the roadway. 
Reference 541.102 – Definitions of business and residential districts 
Reference 541.401 – Definitions of stop, stand, and park 
Note: Remember the definition of “stop when prohibited” (TRC 541.401).  Does not apply when a 
vehicle is complying with the directions of a peace officer, a traffic control signal, or to avoid conflict 
with other traffic.  A vehicle stopped in the roadway in one of these situations cannot be considered to 
be in violation of this section. 
Exceptions to this Section:  
(1) disabled vehicles that cannot be moved or stopped elsewhere 
(2) garbage trucks picking up trash 
(3) tow trucks performing towing duties 
These vehicles are frequently stopped in the roadway but they are not in violation of this section.   
Authorized emergency vehicles are also excepted from stop/stand/park regulations per 546.001. 
545.302 – Stopping, Standing, Or Parking Prohibited in Certain Places 
The following regulations apply regardless of whether or not the vehicle is in a business or residential 
district. 
Reference 541.401 – definitions of stop, stand, and park.   
(a) A vehicle may not stop, stand, or park: 
(1) On the roadway side of an already parked vehicle (i.e. “double parked") 
(2) On a sidewalk 
(3) In an intersection 
(4) On a crosswalk 
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 120 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(6) alongside or opposite street excavation or obstruction if traffic would be obstructed 
(7) On a bridge or elevated structure on a highway or in a tunnel 
(8) On a railroad track 
(9) Where an official sign prohibits it  
(b) Aside from picking up or discharging passengers, a vehicle may not stand or park in the following 
places: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway 
(2)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant 
(3)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection 
(4)  Within 30 feet on the approach to a flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal 
(5)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance of a properly marked fire station (75 feet if on the 
opposite side of the road)  
(6)  Where an official sign prohibits standing 
(c) Aside from temporarily loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, an operator may not park 
an occupied or unoccupied vehicle:  
(1)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing 
(2)  Where an official sign prohibits parking 
(d) A bicycle may stop, stand, or park on a sidewalk as long as it does not impede sidewalk traffic. 
(e) There are exceptions for an elevator constructor responding to an elevator emergency. 
(f) The regulations in this section do not apply if the avoidance of conflict with other traffic is necessary 
or if the operator is complying with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control 
device. 
Examples – these vehicles are stopped in locations that would ordinarily be illegal, however the stop 
is not considered illegal because the vehicles are complying with official traffic control devices. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 121 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 122 
545.303 – Additional Parking Regulations 
(a) When a vehicle is parked on a two way roadway, the right side wheels must be within 18 inches of 
the curb or edge of the roadway.   
(b) On a one-way roadway, the wheels can be within 18 inches of either curb as long as the vehicle is 
facing the correct direction in compliance with traffic flow on the roadway.   
Apply It: 
 
For each parking scenario, determine if there is a violation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
545.304 – Moving the Vehicle of Another; Unlawful Parking 
It is a violation to move a vehicle that is not lawfully under the person's control into an area where a 
vehicle is prohibited under Section 545.302 or away from a curb a distance that is unlawful under 
Section 545.303 (18 inches). 
YES          NO 
YES          NO 
YES          NO 
YES          NO YES          NO 
YES          NO 
545.305 – Removal of Unlawfully Stopped Vehicles 
This section gives peace officers the authority to remove/tow vehicles from the highway. 
Peace officers as described by Article 2.12 of the Code of Criminal Procedures may remove vehicles 
described in the following circumstances: 
(1) Vehicles left unattended on a bridge, viaduct or tunnel AND obstructing traffic 
(2) Vehicles unlawfully parked AND blocking a private drive 
(3) Vehicles reported stolen 
(4) Vehicles identified as stolen in a warrant 
(5) Vehicles left unattended and abandoned more than 48 hours 
(6) Vehicles that are disabled and the owner is incapacitated and cannot move it or the owner is 
not in the immediate area 
(7) Vehicles that are disabled and the owner does not designate a tow company 
(8) Vehicles operated by an arrested person taken in custody 
(9) Vehicles that are a hazard, interfere with normal function of government agency, or due to 
catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance, is imperiled. 
If a law enforcement agency removes a vehicle in an unincorporated area, they are required to notify 
the sheriff.   
The owner of the removed vehicle is responsible for the cost of removal and storage. 
Reference Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 18.23 – if a peace officer directs the towing for evidentiary or 
examination purposes, the officer’s agency is responsible for the cost of towing. 
Reference Occupational Code 2308.451 – if a peace officer directs the towing of a vehicle and is not 
covered under an authorized circumstance, the officer’s agency is responsible for towing/storage cost. 
Remembering the 9 times an officer can remove a vehicle from the highway: 
It can be helpful to divide these nine times into the following three categories 
• Roadway Safety and Traffic Flow (4 times) 
• Cop Stuff (3 times) 
• Disabled Vehicle (2 times) 
Roadway Safety and Traffic Flow 
1) Unattended on Bridge, viaduct, or tunnel 
2) Illegally parked and blocking a private drive 
3) Unattended/abandoned for more than 48 hours; or 
4) Hazardous or imperiled due to emergency 
Cop Stuff 
1) Vehicle is reported as stolen 
2) Vehicle is identified as stolen in a warrant; or 
3) Driver is arrested and in custody 
Disabled Vehicle 
1) Owner is incapacitated/not on scene; or 
2) Owner is on scene but does not designate towing company 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 123 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.3051 – Removal of Personal Property From Roadway Right-of-Way 
A metropolitan rapid transit authority, a regional transportation authority, a fire department, or a law 
enforcement agency may remove personal property from the highway right-of-way if the property 
blocks the roadway or endangers public safety. 
Personal Property is defined in this section – a vehicle described by Section 545.305 (9 times an officer 
can tow), spilled cargo, a hazardous material, a hazardous substance, or an unattended manufactured 
home. 
Note: The Texas Department of Transportation also has authority to remove personal property from the 
highway.  This authority is described in TRC 472.012. 
545.308 – Presumption 
The governing body of a local authority may pass an ordinance or order providing that the registered 
owner of a vehicle is presumed to be the person who stopped, stood, or parked an unattended vehicle 
when the vehicle is found to be illegally stopped, standing, or parked. 
In other words, a charge can be filed against the registered owner of an unattended vehicle without the 
need to prove that the owner is actually the person who illegally parked the vehicle. 
BPOC Objective 22.14 – Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter H, TC. 
545.351 – Maximum Speed Requirement 
(a)  An operator may not drive at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under existing 
circumstances.  Reference 545.352(a) – the speed limit is considered to be the reasonable and prudent 
speed under normal driving conditions.  Exceeding the speed limit is prima facie evidence of an 
unreasonable, imprudent speed, and therefore a violation exists. 
(b)(1) An operator may not drive at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions 
and having regard for actual and potential hazards then existing.  The offense related to this subsection 
is Unsafe Speed. 
(b)(2) An operator shall control the speed of the vehicle as necessary to avoid colliding with another 
person or vehicle that is on or entering the highway in compliance with law and the duty of each person 
to use due care.  The offense related to this subsection is Fail to Control Speed. 
(c) This subsection describes additional circumstances that could necessitate a reduced speed to stay 
within the “reasonable and prudent” requirement.  An operator shall drive at an appropriate reduced 
speed if: 
1) Approaching and crossing an intersection or RR grade crossing 
2) Going around a curve 
3) Approaching a hillcrest 
4) Traveling on a winding or narrow roadway, and 
5) a special hazard exists with regard to traffic or weather or highway conditions. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 124 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code      BPOC Student Manual - Page 125 
Apply It: 
The driver of this vehicle runs off the road and overturns in a curve.  
The driver tells you he didn’t realize how sharp the curve was.  He tried 
to keep it on the road but could not. 
Which of the following is true? 
a) The driver of the vehicle committed Fail to Control Speed
 b) The driver of the vehicle committed Speeding over the Limit
 c) The driver of the vehicle committed Unsafe Speed
 d) There is not a law violation if the vehicle did not strike another
 vehicle or person
 The blue pickup approached slow moving traffic too 
quickly and made an evasive movement to the right, 
striking a vehicle that was parked on the shoulder. 
Is this Fail to Control Speed? 
YES       NO 
545.352 – Prima Facie Speed Limits 
For the purpose of enforcing 545.351, a speed that is in excess of the speed limit is considered to be 
unreasonable, imprudent, and unlawful.   
If a speed limit is not posted, the following speeds are considered to be the speed limit in each of the 
following circumstances or on each of the following roadway types: 
• Urban District – 30 MPH (defined in 545.352(d)(3))
 • Alley – 15 MPH
 • State Highway – 70 MPH
 • US/IH – 70 MPH
 • Farm to Market or Ranch to Market road – 70 MPH
 • County Road or Numbered Highway– 60 MPH
 • School Bus with a CMV Inspection on a state or US highway – 60 MPH
 • School Bus without a CMV Inspection or on a county/local road – 50 MPH
 • Beach – 15 MPH
(c)  Speed limits for the following vehicles are the same as for any other vehicle: 
• buses and other vehicle that transport passengers for hire 
• commercial motor vehicles transporting mail 
• light trucks 
• school activity buses 
(e) Speed limits are required to be the same for daytime and nighttime. 
545.353 – Authority of Texas Transportation Commission to Alter Speed Limits 
TxDOT may alter speeds limits and make them different than the prima facie speed limits on a particular 
roadway system.  TxDOT cannot alter a speed limit above 75 MPH except in certain counties with sparse 
populations.  In such areas, speed limits may be set at 80 or 85 MPH (h-1, h-2) 
(j)  Lower speed limits will not be declared for environmental purposes. 
(k) HB 1633 in the 88th legislative session (2023) added this subsection to allow the Texas Transportation 
Commission to establish a variable speed limit program to temporarily lower the speed limit due to 
inclement weather, congestion, road construction, or any other condition affecting traffic safety.  
545.355 – Authority of Commissioner's Court to Alter Speed Limits 
The Commissioner’s court in a county may alter speed limits on county roads as necessary for public 
safety.  County road speed limits may not be set in excess of 70 MPH. 
The county can reduce speeds limits to not less than 30 MPH on most county roads or 20 MPH in 
residence districts and within 500 feet of schools. 
545.361 – Special Speed Limitations 
(a)  Moped or a motorcycle with an engine displacement of 250 cc or less – may not drive at a speed of 
more than 35 miles per hour at night unless equipped with headlamps that reveal a person or vehicle at 
least 300 feet ahead.   
(b) A vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires – may be operated at a maximum speed of 10 MPH.  
(c) on a bridge or elevated structure – may not drive faster than a posted maximum speed established 
for the safety of the bridge or structure. 
(d) Self-propelled machinery designed or adapted for applying fertilizer/agricultural chemicals – may 
not driver faster than 30 MPH unless registered under chapter 502 (502.431 – registration of fertilizer 
vehicle). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 126 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.363 – Minimum Speed Regulation 
An operator may not drive so slowly as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, 
except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation.  Most roadways do not have a posted 
minimum speed, therefore enforcement for impeding traffic is based on an officer’s ability to articulate 
how the normal and reasonable movement of traffic was impeded.   
Roadway conditions, passing zones, improved shoulders, maximum safe operating speed for the vehicle 
in question, and number of vehicles impeded should be observed and documented when filing a charge 
under this section.  
Reference TXDPS Administrative Code – Title 37, Part 1, Rule 3.24 – This section of the administrative 
code contains interpretations for enforcement of impeding traffic:   
1.  Impeding traffic should not be enforced against a vehicle that is traveling at/near the speed limit.   
2.  A vehicle can still be considered to be impeding traffic even when going as fast as the vehicle can 
safely be operated if the operator has the opportunity to drive on the shoulder to allow traffic to 
pass but does not. 
(c) If an actual minimum speed limit is posted, it is a violation to travel below the 
minimum posted limit (arrest title Speed Under Minimum).  A vehicle may travel below 
the posted minimum speed limit if necessary to comply with law (i.e. stopping for traffic 
lights, yielding ROW, etc.) or when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation. 
545.365 – Speed Limit Exception for Emergencies 
The speed limits established in the Transportation Code do not apply to: 
1) Authorized emergency vehicles responding to a call 
2) Police patrols (always, not just when responding to calls) 
3) Physician or ambulance responding to emergency 
Note: There is no definition of “police patrol” in the TRC.  Common sense indicates this would be a 
police officer in a police vehicle doing job related things.   
Reminder: a physician responding to an emergency is exempt from the speed laws, however they are 
not considered an “authorized emergency vehicle” and cannot engage in other driving behavior 
authorized for emergency vehicles in 546.001.  Their only exemption is from speed regulation. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 127 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
BPOC Objective 22.15 – Given a driving situation, determine that a violation exists as it applies to 
Chapter 545, Subchapter I, TC. 
545.401 – Reckless Driving 
A person commits this offense if they operate a vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of 
persons or property.   
This is one of the few TRC violations that can be enforced in areas other than on public highways.  
Reckless Driving can be filed in parking lots or other public places as long as the officer can articulate the 
willful or wanton disregard for safety.   
This offense carries a fine of up to $200 and up to 30 days in jail, which makes it a Class B Misdemeanor 
(Penal Code 12.41).  Because this offense is a Class B Misdemeanor, officers should arrest the offender.  
Do not cite and release. 
Case Law – White v. State,  647 S.W.2d 751, the appeals court essentially established a definition for 
willful or wanton disregard – the deliberate conscious indifference to the safety of others. 
545.402 – Moving a Parked Vehicle 
Movement of a stopped, standing, or parked vehicle cannot begin until such movement can be made 
safely.  The arrest title for this violation is Unsafe Start from Stopped, Standing, or Parked Position. 
545.403 – Driving Through Safety Zone 
An operator may not drive through or in a safety zone. 
Reference 541.302(12) – "Safety zone" means the area in a roadway officially designated for exclusive 
pedestrian use and that is protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible 
at all times while so designated. 
545.404 – Unattended Motor Vehicle 
Before leaving a motor vehicle unattended, the operator must: 
1) stop the engine 
2) lock the ignition 
3) remove the key from the ignition 
4) set the parking brake 
5) and turn front wheels to the curb if standing on a grade 
Reminder: The offenses in Subtitle C only apply to a vehicle on a highway (542.001).  Vehicles left 
unattended in parking lots or residential driveways are not regulated by this section. 
545.407 – Following or Obstructing Fire Apparatus or Ambulance 
Fire Apparatus 
An operator may not follow closer than 500 feet a fire apparatus responding to an alarm or drive 
into or park a vehicle in the block where the fire apparatus has stopped for an alarm call. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 128 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Ambulance 
An operator may not follow closer than 500 feet an ambulance that is flashing red lights and may 
not drive or park in an area an ambulance has been summoned in a manner intended to interfere 
with the arrival or departure of the ambulance. 
NOTE:  This law is specific to fire trucks and ambulances.  There is no mention of police vehicles and the 
TRC does not prescribe a specific following distance for responding police vehicles or other authorized 
emergency vehicles. 
545.408 – Crossing Fire Hose 
It is unlawful to cross a firehose without consent from the department official in command when the 
hose is intended for use at a fire or alarm of fire. 
545.409 – Drawbars and Trailer Hitches; Saddle-Mount Towing 
The drawbar or other connecting device between a towing vehicle and a towed vehicle must be strong 
enough to pull all the weight drawn and must not be longer than 15 feet. 
If towing with a chain, rope, or cable, a white flag at least 12 inches square must be displayed on the 
rope, cable, or chain. 
Word Association:  Towing   Not longer than 15 feet   white flag on chain or cable 
No more than three motor vehicles 
may be attached to the towing 
vehicle by the saddle-mount method 
(pictured right). 
545.410 – Towing Safety Chains 
Towing safety chains are required when a passenger car or light truck is towing a trailer or another 
vehicle.  These vehicle types are defined in 541.201.  
Passenger car – a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, used to transport persons and designed 
to accommodate 10 or fewer passengers, including the operator. 
Light truck – a truck, including a pickup truck, panel delivery truck, or carryall truck, that has a 
manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of 2,000 pounds or less. 
There are four exceptions to the use of safety chains: 
(1)  Trailers used for agricultural purposes 
(2)  Vehicles operated under Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (most CMVs) 
(3)  Trailers with safety chains installed prior to 8/18/1994 (when these standards were adopted)   
(4)  Fifth wheel or gooseneck trailers (this exception is only found in admin code) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 129 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Safety chains must be of a type approved by the department and attached in a manner approved by the 
department.  This language means there is accompanying administrative code for this section. 
Reference Texas Administrative Code Title 37, Part 1, Chapter 21, Rule 21.5 
Specifications for Safety Chains from Administrative Code: 
(1)  Two separate chains must be used and they must be of equal length on both sides of the tongue, 
(2)  Chains may not be directly welded to the towed vehicle, but must be attached by bolts, pins, or 
other methods, 
(3)  Chains must be long enough to permit free turning, 
(4)  Chains may not contact the roadway surface when in operation, 
(5)  Chains must be connected so as to prevent the tow-bar from dropping to the ground in case of a 
separation of the units, 
(6)  Chains must be strong enough to prevent separation in case of disengagement of units. 
545.412 – Child Safety Seat 
Child Safety Seats are required for children who are younger than 8 years of age unless the child is taller 
than 4’9”.   
Clarification:   
• If a child is taller than 4’9”, a child safety seat is not required regardless of the child’s age.  
• If a child is 8 years of age or older, a child safety seat is not required regardless of the child’s 
height.   
This law applies to a person operating a passenger vehicle.   This term is defined in subsection (f)(2): 
In this section, "Passenger vehicle" means a passenger car, light truck, sport utility vehicle, passenger 
van designed to transport 15 or fewer passengers, including the driver, truck, or truck tractor. 
The child must be “secured” in the child safety seat system according to the manufacturer’s instructions 
and limitations for size/weight.   
(e) There are two exceptions to the application of the child safety seat law (no safety seat required):  
(1)  The person is transporting passengers for hire (taxis, limos, Uber, etc.), or 
(2)  The person is transporting a child in a vehicle in which all seating positions equipped with child 
passenger safety seat systems or safety belts are occupied. 
Apply It: 
Is mom committing a violation?                
YES              
 NO                                                                                                      
Mom 
Is mom committing a   
violation? 
YES                  
   NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 130 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 131 
 
 
Is mom committing a violation?           
        YES                     NO                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Is mom committing a violation?             Is the taxi driver                      
                         committing a violation? 
 
            YES               NO   YES               NO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
545.413 – Safety Belts; Offense 
Just like child safety seats, this offense is specific to “passenger vehicles” as defined in 545.412(f)(2): 
"Passenger vehicle" means a passenger car, light truck, sport utility vehicle, passenger van designed to 
transport 15 or fewer passengers, including the driver, truck, or truck tractor. 
(a)(1) All persons riding in seats equipped with safety belts are required to be secured by the safety 
belts.  If the person is 15 years of age or older they are committing a violation if they are not secured 
regardless of whether they are the driver or a passenger (i.e. an unrestrained passenger 15 YOA or older 
may be issued a citation for not wearing their safety belt). 
This section requires that people be “secured” by safety belts.  This is defined in 545.412(f)(4) – using 
the lap belt and any shoulder straps according to the instructions of the manufacturer.  
(a)(2) The operator of a school bus must be secured by the safety belt (the passengers on a school bus 
are not required to wear safety belts even if the bus is equipped because the school bus falls outside the 
definition of “passenger vehicle”). 
Reference 547.701(e) – many school buses are now required to be equipped with safety belts.  The 
TRC does not require school bus passengers to wear safety belts even if equipped. 
driver 
Is mom committing a 
violation? 
YES                NO 
sitting in 
dad’s lap 
(b)  If the unsecured person is a passenger younger than 17 years of age, the driver is committing a 
violation for having an unsecure child riding in their vehicle.   
Note:  This creates an interesting situation – an unsecured 16 year-old passenger could be cited for not 
wearing a safety belt under (a).  The driver could also be cited for having a passenger younger than 17 
YOA unrestrained under (b).  Do not cite both.  Use officer discretion and chose one or the other to cite. 
(c) If a vehicle was originally designed with front safety belts it is considered to be equipped with safety 
belts even if the owner has subsequently removed the belts (547.601). 
(e) There are numerous defenses to prosecution: 
(1)  written statement from a licensed physician stating that for a medical reason the person should 
not wear a safety belt (presented roadside); 
(2)  the person presents to the court a statement from a licensed physician stating that for a 
medical reason the person should not wear a safety belt; 
(3)  the person is employed by the United States Postal Service delivering mail/packages; 
(4)  the person is engaged in newspaper delivery from the vehicle; 
(5)  the person is employed by a public or private utility company and is engaged in the reading of 
meters or performing a similar duty; 
(6)  the person is operating a farm truck (NOTE: specific to the operator, no mention of 
passengers); or 
(7)  the person is the operator of or a passenger in a garbage truck. 
Apply It: 
16 
YOA 
16 
YOA 
unsecured 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for not wearing his safety belt? 
YES               
 NO 
Can you issue a citation to the passenger for not wearing his safety belt? 
YES               
 NO 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for transporting the unrestrained 
passenger? 
YES               
 NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 132 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 133 
 
Can you issue a citation to mom for not wearing her safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to the passenger for not wearing his safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to mom for transporting the unrestrained passenger? 
              YES                NO 
 
 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for not wearing his safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to the passenger for not wearing his safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for transporting the unrestrained 
passenger? 
              YES                NO 
 
 
 
 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for not wearing his safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to the passenger for not wearing his safety belt? 
              YES                NO 
 
Can you issue a citation to the driver for transporting the unrestrained 
passenger? 
              YES                NO 
 
Mom 
unsecured 
16 
YOA 
16 
YOA 
unsecured 
14 
YOA 
16 
YOA 
unsecured 
17 
YOA 
17 
YOA 
15 
YOA 
unsecured 
18 
YOA 
14 
YOA 
unsecured 
How many citations could you issue the driver?   ____________________ 
Is there anyone in the vehicle not committing a violation? 
YES               
 NO 
545.414 – Riding in Open Beds; Offense 
It is an offense to have a person younger than 18 years of age riding in the open bed of a pickup or in an 
open flat-bed trailer.  The operator of the vehicle is the person committing the offense. 
(c)  There are five defenses to prosecution: 
(1)  operating the vehicle in a parade or in an emergency; 
(2)  operating the vehicle to transport farmworkers from one field to another field on a farm-to
market road, ranch-to-market road, or county road outside a municipality; 
(3)  operating the vehicle on a beach; 
(4)  operating a vehicle that is the only vehicle owned or operated by the members of a household; 
(5)  operating the vehicle in a permitted hayride. 
Does this mean someone 18 YOA or older can legally ride in an open pickup bed?  Yes.  Is there a safety 
belt violation for someone 18 YOA riding in a pickup bed?  No.  545.413 requires that a safety belt be 
worn only when riding in a seat equipped with a safety belt. 
545.4145 – Riding in or on Boat/Personal Watercraft Drawn by Vehicle; Offense 
It is an offense to draw a boat or personal watercraft down the road when a person younger than 18 
years of age is occupying the boat or personal watercraft.   
There are two defenses to prosecution: 
(1)  operating the motor vehicle in a parade or in an emergency; or 
(2)  operating the motor vehicle on a beach. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 134 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.415 – Backing a Vehicle 
An operator may not back a vehicle on a highway unless the movement can be made safely and without 
interfering with other traffic (see case law below). 
An operator may not back the vehicle on the shoulder or a roadway of a limited access or controlled 
access highway regardless of whether or not the backing is done safely.   
Case Law – Salgado v. State, Court of Appeals, 13-17-00681-CR – an appeals court examined the concept 
of “interfering with other traffic”.  An officer had to come to a complete stop to allow a vehicle to finish 
backing out of a driveway.  The court held that this was “interference” even though a crash did not 
occur. 
Apply It: 
The driver of this vehicle realizes he missed his 
turn.  No other vehicles are around, so he places 
his vehicle in reverse and backs up about 100 
feet before turning into this private drive. 
Has the driver committed a violation? 
YES                
   NO 
Jim Bob is driving on a controlled access 
highway when he sees a glorious 12 point 
buck dead in the ditch.  He slams on his 
brakes and pulls onto the shoulder.  There 
are no other cars around, so Jim Bob backs 
up on the shoulder to get back to the buck 
so he can saw its antlers off. 
Has Jim Bob committed a violation? 
545.416 – Riding on Motorcycles 
YES                 
 NO 
(a) The operator of a motorcycle or moped is required to sit on the permanent and regular seat attached 
to the vehicle. 
(b) and (c) A passenger may not be carried on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry a 
passenger, including handholds and footrests. Passengers must ride only on permanent seats. 
(d), (e), and (f) The minimum age for a motorcycle or autocycle passenger is 5 years of age unless the 
passenger is in a sidecar.  There is no minimum age for sidecar passengers. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 135 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.417 – Obstruction of Operator's View or Driving Mechanism 
(a) It is a violation to operate a vehicle when the view of the operator to the front or the sides is 
obstructed or there is interference with the operator’s control over the driving mechanism.  It is a 
violation if the obstruction/interference comes from the vehicle’s load or from passengers, but only if 
there are more than three passengers in the front seat. 
(b)   A passenger commits an offense by riding in a position that interferes with the driver’s view or 
control over the driving mechanism.  Note the passenger is committing an offense under this 
subsection, not the driver. 
545.418 – Opening Vehicle Doors 
It is a violation to open the door of a vehicle so as to interfere with moving traffic.   
It is also a violation to leave the door open on the side of a parked vehicle closest to moving traffic for 
longer than is necessary to load or unload a passenger.   
545.419 – Riding in House Trailer 
It is a violation to occupy a house trailer while it is being moved on the highway. 
Note:  The person occupying the house trailer is the person committing the violation (not the driver of 
the towing vehicle). 
Reference 541.201(5) – "House trailer" means a trailer or semitrailer, other than a towable recreational 
vehicle, that: (A)  is transportable on a highway in one or more sections; (B)  is less than 45 feet in length, 
excluding tow bar, while in the traveling mode; (C)  is built on a permanent chassis; (D)  is designed to be 
used as a dwelling or for commercial purposes if connected to required utilities; and (E)  includes 
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.  
545.4191 – Person Riding in Trailer 
It is a violation to operate a truck, road tractor, or truck tractor (all defined in 541.201) while a person is 
occupying a trailer or semi-trailer being drawn by the vehicle.  
This offense is a Class B Misdemeanor, violators should be arrested, not cited and released. 
There are several defenses to prosecution: 
(1)  the person was operating or towing the vehicle: 
(A)  in a parade or in an emergency; 
(B)  to transport farmworkers from one field to another field on a farm-to-market road, ranch-to
market road, or county road outside a municipality; or 
(C)  in a permitted hayride; 
(2)  the person operating or towing the vehicle did not know that another person occupied the 
trailer; or 
(3)  the person occupying the trailer or semitrailer was in a part of the trailer or semitrailer designed 
for human habitation. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 136 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.420 – Racing on Highway 
(a) It is a violation to engage in: 
1) a race 
2) a vehicle speed contest or competition 
3) a drag race or acceleration contest 
4) a test of physical endurance of the operator, or  
5) an exhibition of vehicle speed or acceleration in connection with a drag race.   
(b) Drag race and race are both defined in this section to clarify activity that constitutes a violation. 
The language “exhibition of acceleration” appears here only when in connection with a race.  A vehicle 
that accelerates quickly, peels out, fishtails, etc. is not committing the offense of “exhibition of 
acceleration” or “Acceleration Contest” if it is not done in connection with a drag race (Case Law – State 
v. Guzman, Court of Appeals, 240 S.W.3d 362).  
(d) – (h) The first offense for racing is a Class B Misdemeanor.  The offense is enhanced to a Class A 
misdemeanor if the operator has a previous conviction for this offense, is in possession of an open 
alcohol container, or is intoxicated.   
This offense is a State Jail Felony if the operator has two or more previous convictions.  It is a Third 
Degree Felony if the race results in a crash causing bodily injury.  It is a Second Degree Felony if the race 
results in serious bodily injury or death.   
Clarification – If two vehicles are racing and one crashes and causes serious bodily injury/death, the 
other vehicle’s driver can be charged with an enhanced offense even if it was not directly involved in the 
crash – see Case Law – Daniel v. State, Court of Appeals, 478 S.W.3d 773. 
545.421 – Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Police Officer; Offense 
In order for a person to commit this offense, they must willfully or intentionally flee or refuse to stop 
for a police officer who is giving an audible or visual signal to stop – this could mean emergency lights, 
siren, hand signal, or voice command.  The police officer must be in uniform and in a marked police 
vehicle. 
This offense begins as a Class B Misdemeanor and can be enhanced to a Class A Misdemeanor if the 
violator recklessly places another in imminent danger of serious bodily injury. 
Reference Penal Code 38.04 – Evading Arrest – Evading Arrest in a motor vehicle as described in the 
Penal Code carries a higher penalty (felony offense).  Additionally, there is no requirement for the officer 
to be in uniform or for the police vehicle to be marked.  The person evading must simply know that they 
are evading a peace officer attempting to lawfully arrest or detain him. 
545.422 – Crossing Sidewalk or Hike and Bike Trail   
It is an offense to drive a motor vehicle on a sidewalk or a hike and bike trail except at permanent or 
temporary driveways.   
Note:  This statute applies specifically to a “motor vehicle”.  It does not apply to electric bicycles, 
segways, and non-motorized devices such as bicycles, skateboards, scooters, etc.  Motor vehicle is 
defined in 541.201(11). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 137 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 138 
545.423 – Crossing Property 
(a) A driver may not cross a sidewalk or drive through a driveway, parking lot, or business or residential 
entrance without stopping the vehicle. 
Note: The requirement is that the stop take place somewhere in the parking lot, not immediately before 
exiting the parking lot.  Once a stop has been made somewhere in the parking lot the requirement has 
been met.  
(b) It is a violation to cut across a driveway or parking lot at an intersection to turn right or left from one 
highway to another.  This violation usually occurs because someone is attempting to skip the traffic 
signal at the intersection. 
 
Apply It: 
 
This vehicle enters the parking lot, 
stops for 2 seconds, and then exits 
the parking lot. 
 
Has the vehicle violated 545.423(a)? 
           YES                         NO 
 
Has the vehicle violated 545.423(b)? 
  YES                          NO 
 
 
 
 
This vehicle enters the parking lot, stops for 2 seconds, 
and then exits the parking lot. 
 
Has the vehicle violated 545.423(a)? 
             YES                         NO 
 
Has the vehicle violated 545.423(b)? 
             YES                          NO 
 
 
 
Stops for 2 
seconds 
Stops for 2 
seconds 
parking lot 
545.424 – Operation of Vehicle by Person Under 18 Years of Age 
Certain restrictions are imposed on the driving privileges of persons under the age of 18.  This will 
appear as a “G” restriction on the provisional license. 
(a) and (a-1) A person under 18 years of age may not: 
1) Operate a motor vehicle while using a wireless communication device, except in case of 
emergency.  This prohibition applies even if the wireless communication device is being used 
with a hands-free device.   
2) Drive after midnight and before 5 a.m. unless the operation of the vehicle is necessary for work, 
school, or an emergency. 
3) Drive with more than one passenger in the vehicle under 21 years of age who is not a family 
member. 
(a-2) A person under 18 years of age may operate a moped after midnight and before 5 a.m. if in sight 
of the person’s parent or guardian. 
(b) and (b-1) A person under 17 years of age who holds a restricted motorcycle license may not: 
1) Operate a motorcycle while using a wireless communication device, except in case of 
emergency. 
2) Operate a motorcycle for the first 12 months between the hours of midnight and 5 a.m. unless 
in sight of the person’s parent or guardian or when the operation is necessary for employment, 
school activities, or an emergency. 
(e)  A peace officer may not stop a vehicle or detain the operator of a vehicle for the sole purpose of 
determining whether the operator of the vehicle is violating this section.  In other words, if an officer 
sees a driver that appears as if they may not be 18 years of age talking on a cell phone or traveling after 
midnight, the officer may not stop the vehicle solely to determine whether or not the driver is under 18. 
(g) The fine for this offense is $25 - $99 for a first offense.  If the person has been previously convicted of 
this offense, a subsequent conviction carries a fine of $100 - $200. 
545.425 – Use of Wireless Communication Device in a School Zone 
It is a violation to operate a vehicle in a school crossing zone (i.e. while the school zone is active) while 
using a wireless communication device unless using a hands free device or while the vehicle is stopped.   
Reference 541.302 – "School crossing zone" means a reduced-speed zone designated on a street by a 
local authority to facilitate safe crossing of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private 
elementary or secondary school during the time the reduced speed limit applies. 
A sign advising of the prohibition must be posted at the beginning of the school zone to 
enforce this section (unless in a municipality that has a blanket prohibition on cell phone 
use within the entire city if signs are posted at major entrances to the city). 
This section does not apply to the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in the 
course of their official duties. 
A school bus operator may not use a wireless communication device while operating 
with a minor passenger on the bus unless the bus is stopped. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 139 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
545.4251 – Use of Portable Wireless Communication Device for Electronic Messaging 
This is the Texas “Texting and Driving” law.   
Reference 543.004 – officers are required to cite and release for this offense.  May not arrest if the 
violator is willing to sign the promise to appear. 
(b) This section prohibits the use of a wireless communication device to read, write or send an electronic 
message unless the vehicle is stopped.  "Electronic message" means data that is read from or entered 
into a wireless communication device for the purpose of communicating with another person. 
To be prosecuted, the behavior must be committed in the presence of or within the view of a peace 
officer or established by other evidence (cell phone records, phone imaging, video evidence, witnesses).   
(c) Defenses – there are numerous affirmative defenses to prosecution: 
1) used in conjunction with a hands-free device; 
2) used to navigate using a GPS or navigation system; 
3) used to report illegal activity, summon emergency help, or enter information into a software 
application that provides information relating to traffic and road conditions to users of the 
application;  
4) used to read a message that the person reasonably believed concerned an emergency; 
5) the device was affixed to the vehicle to relay information in the course of the operator's 
occupational duties between the operator and a dispatcher/software application service, or 
6) used to activate a function that plays music. 
(d) Exceptions – this section does not apply to: 
1) an operator of an authorized emergency/ law enforcement vehicle acting in an official capacity.   
2) FCC licensed radio operators while operating a radio frequency device (HAM/amateur radio). 
(e) and (f) Penalties and Enhancements: 
• First Offense – $25 - $99 
• Subsequent Offense after conviction – $100-$200 
• Caused death or SBI of another – Class A Misdemeanor (Up to $4,000 fine, up to 1 year in jail) 
(h)  TXDOT is required to place signs regarding this law where Interstate or US highways enter Texas. 
(i) Peace officers may not take possession or inspect a wireless communication device in the course of a 
traffic stop for this violation without legal authorization (warrant, court order). 
DPS Policy:  General Manual Chapter 11, Section 50.02 – Unless there are exigent circumstances, DPS 
policy prohibits the use of a wireless communication device or computer to read, write, or send a text 
message or email while operating a Department motor vehicle unless the vehicle is stopped.  Although 
the TRC exempts the operators of law enforcement vehicles from this section when texting in an official 
capacity, DPS policy generally prohibits this action. 
545.4252 – Use of Wireless Communication Device on School Property; Offense 
An operator may not use a wireless communication device while operating a motor vehicle on the 
property of a public elementary, middle, junior high, or high school during an active school zone unless 
the vehicle is stopped or the wireless communication device is used with a hands-free device. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 140 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
It is an affirmative defense if the wireless communication device was used to make an emergency call. 
Exceptions – this section does not apply to: 
1) an operator of an authorized emergency/law enforcement vehicle acting in an official capacity.   
2) FCC licensed radio operators while operating a radio frequency device (HAM/amateur radio). 
545.426 – Operation of School Bus 
A person may not operate a school bus unless the door is closed and the bus does not have more 
passengers than it was designed to carry. 
The school bus driver is required to prohibit the passengers from standing, or sitting on the floor or 
anywhere else not designed as a seat. 
545.427 – Operation of Vehicle with Insufficient Undercarriage Clearance 
An operator may not drive on or cross a railroad grade crossing unless the vehicle being operated has 
sufficient undercarriage clearance.   
545.451 – Definitions (Automated Motor Vehicles) 
(2)  Automated motor vehicle – has an automated driving system installed. 
(1)  Automated driving system – the system on an automated motor vehicle that allows it to perform 
the “entire dynamic driving task”. 
(3)  Entire dynamic driving task – operational and tactical aspects, including steering, braking, 
accelerating, monitoring the vehicle and roadway, responding to events, determining when to change 
lanes, turning, using signals, and other related actions.  This is, for all practical purposes, a “self-driving” 
car.  This goes far beyond safety features like adaptive cruise control and lane-keeping assistance. 
(4) Human Operator – natural person who controls the dynamic driving task (i.e. can take control from 
the automated motor vehicle and drive the vehicle themselves). 
(5) Owner – defined in 502.001 (person who holds title, has legal right to possess the vehicle, or has the 
legal right to control the vehicle). 
545.453 - Operator of Automated Motor Vehicle 
Generally speaking, the Texas Transportation Code holds the “operator” of a vehicle accountable for 
complying with traffic laws. But who is operating an automated motor vehicle when there is not a 
human sitting in the driver’s seat controlling the vehicle? Who is operating an automated motor vehicle 
when the vehicle is empty? 
For the purposes of assessing compliance with traffic or motor vehicle laws, the “owner” of the 
vehicle is considered to be the operator. 
The automated driving system is considered to be licensed to operate the vehicle and a licensed human 
operator is not required to be in the vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 141 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Reference 502.001 – for the purses of this section, “owner” is defined as a person who: (A)  holds the 
legal title of a vehicle; (B)  has the legal right of possession of a vehicle; or (C)  has the legal right of 
control of a vehicle. 
Example: An Automated Motor Vehicle owned by Waymo is not carrying any passengers. The vehicle 
disregards a red stop and go signal and is subsequently stopped by a police officer. The Transportation 
Code considers the vehicle owner (Waymo) to be the operator of the vehicle at the time of the violation, 
therefore the company could be issued a citation. 
545.454 – Automated Motor Vehicle Operation 
Automated motor vehicles may operate in Texas even without a human operator in the vehicle as long 
as the vehicle is capable of complying with all applicable traffic and motor vehicle laws and is equipped 
with a recording device that will store crash information.   
The vehicle must comply with all applicable federal laws and safety standards, must be titled and 
registered, and must be covered by insurance. 
Reference 547.618 –equipment normally required to be on motor vehicles is not required to be on an 
automated motor vehicle if the equipment is not pertinent to the automated motor vehicle’s ability to 
safely operate. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 142 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 4 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
1. An operator passing another vehicle shall return to an authorized lane of travel before coming 
within __________________ of an approaching vehicle.    
2. It is a violation for an operator to cross over a double yellow no passing zone center stripe to turn 
left into a private drive. 
a.  True                           
b.  False 
3. Fill in the blank with the seven times an operator is permitted to drive on the right improved 
shoulder:                                                                                                       
S _____________________________________________ 
A  _____________________________________________ 
D  _____________________________________________ 
P  _____________________________________________ 
A  _____________________________________________ 
P  _____________________________________________ 
A  _____________________________________________ 
4. Which of the following is not exempt from the limitations on driving on the improved shoulder?   
a. An authorized emergency vehicle responding to a call 
b. A physician responding to an emergency                                             
c. A police patrol not responding to a call 
d. A bicycle 
e. A slow-moving vehicle as defined in 547.001 
5. An operator on a roadway divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic shall drive as 
nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and may not move from the lane unless that 
movement can be made safely. 
a.  True                                                                                                               
b.  False 
6. Circle the vehicle that has the 
right-of-way in this diagram. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 143 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 144 
 
7. Following another vehicle with a following distance of less than _______________ constitutes prima 
facie evidence of “Following Too Closely”.   
a.  3 seconds 
b.  200 feet                                                                
c.  four car-lengths 
d.  a specific following distance is not specified in the law 
 
8. An operator stopped for a loading or unloading school bus may not proceed until: 
a.  The flashing red lights are no longer activated 
b.  The school bus driver signals to proceed                                                     
c.  The school bus resumes motion 
d.  An operator may proceed if any of the above are present 
e.  A or B only 
 
9. To make a right turn at an intersection, an operator must make the __________________ and the 
__________________ as close as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.   
            
10. To make a left turn at an intersection, an operator must approach the intersection in the extreme 
______________________ lane lawfully available.      
                                                                                                           
11. List the three times an operator is required to use a turn signal: 
 
1.  ______________________________________ 
2.  ______________________________________         
3.  ______________________________________ 
 
12. An operator must signal for 100 feet of movement before changing lanes. 
       a.  True                         
       b.  False   
 
13.  An operator may not turn the vehicle to move in the opposite direction when approaching a curve 
or the crest of a grade if the vehicle is not visible to the operator of another vehicle approaching 
from either direction within ______________________. 
                  
14. An operator is only required to yield right-of-way to an authorized emergency vehicle if the 
emergency vehicle is approaching the operator and is using certain required emergency equipment. 
a.   True 
b.   False 
 
15. The “Move Over” law applies to stationary police vehicles regardless of whether or not the police 
vehicle is utilizing its emergency lights. 
a. True                                                                                                                     
b. False 
 
16. A vehicle passing a stationary authorized emergency vehicle with emergency lights activated on a 
two-lane roadway must slow to a speed not to exceed ____________ below the posted speed limit. 
17. Which of the following constitutes a violation of parking where prohibited? 
a. A vehicle parked 13 feet from a fire hydrant 
b. A vehicle parked 22 feet from a crosswalk                                  
c. A vehicle 5 feet from a private driveway 
d. A vehicle parked in two parking spaces in a grocery store parking lot 
18. A vehicle parking in a roadway must do so with the right tires within _________________ of the 
right-hand curb or edge of roadway. 
19. To charge an operator with failed to control speed, they must have struck a ___________________ 
or ___________________________ on or entering the highway in compliance with the law. 
20. List the prima facie speed limit for each of the following areas: 
Urban District _________________        
Alley _________________ 
State/US Highway _________________ 
FM Road _________________ 
County Road _________________ 
School Bus with no inspection _________________ 
School Bus with inspection on a county road _________________ 
School Bus with inspection on a US highway _________________ 
Beach _________________ 
21. The speed limit does not apply to a physician en route to the hospital to perform a routine surgery. 
a. True 
b. False                                              
22. The speed limit does not apply to a police vehicle on routine patrol. 
a. True 
b. False              
23. A person may not be charged with reckless driving in a grocery store parking lot because the 
Transportation Code only applies on the highway. 
a. True        
b. False 
24. An operator may not follow a fire truck or an ambulance closer than ___________ when the vehicle 
is responding to an emergency call and/or flashing its emergency lights. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 145 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
25. A drawbar or towing chain/cable may not be longer than _______________. 
26. A red flag at least 12” square must be displayed on a tow chain between vehicles. 
a. True 
b. False 
27.  List the four exceptions to safety chain requirements: 
1. ______________________________________ 
2. ______________________________________ 
3. ______________________________________ 
4. ______________________________________ 
28. A 14-year-old child sitting in the back seat of a vehicle commits a violation when he does not wear his 
safety belt. 
a. True 
b. False 
29. A child at least _________ years of age is not required to use a child safety seat system regardless of 
the child’s height. 
30. A child taller than _________ is not required to use a child safety seat system regardless of the child’s 
age. 
31. The operator of a vehicle can be cited for any unrestrained passenger in the vehicle younger than 
_____ years of age. 
32. All passengers in a vehicle registered as a Farm Truck have a defense to prosecution for not wearing 
safety belts. 
a. True 
b. False 
33. What is the minimum age for a passenger on a motorcycle that is not equipped with a sidecar? 
_______________________________________ 
34. A vehicle may use a parking lot to turn from one highway onto another highway at an intersection as 
long as the vehicle stops somewhere in the parking lot. 
a. True 
b. False 
35. A person under 18 years of age may operate a motor vehicle while using a cell phone as long as the 
phone is being used with a hands-free device. 
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 146 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 5 – TRC CHAPTERS 546 - 547 
SECTION 5.1 – CHAPTER 546 - OPERATION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES AND CERTAIN 
OTHER VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.16 – Identify legal requirements of operating emergency vehicles. 
546.001 – Permissible Conduct (what authorized emergency vehicles can do) 
Important: The activities described in #2-4 on this list are only permissible in the five circumstances 
described in 546.002. 
Authorized emergency vehicles are permitted to: 
1) Park or stand irrespective of other provisions in the TRC.   
2) Proceed past a red stop signal or sign after slowing as necessary for safe operation. 
3) Exceed a maximum speed limit as long as the operator does not endanger life or property. 
4) Disregard a regulation governing the direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
546.002 – When Conduct Permissible  (when they can do it) 
The permissible conduct described in 546.001 (with the exception of parking or standing) is only 
permissible when the authorized emergency vehicle is: 
1) Responding to an emergency 
2) Pursuing a violator of the law 
3) Going to, but not returning from, a fire alarm 
4) Directing or diverting traffic for public safety 
5) Conducting a police escort  
“police escort” is defined in (a) – facilitating the movement of a funeral, oversized or hazardous 
load, or other traffic disruption for public safety purposes by a peace officer. 
546.003 – Audible or Visual Signals Required 
Generally speaking, the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle engaged in conducted permitted 
by 546.001 should use emergency lights and sirens. 
This section does allow for the “discretion of the operator” and there are also a few exceptions 
described in 546.004. 
546.004 – Exceptions to Signal Requirement 
(a)  A volunteer fire fighter who operates a private vehicle as an authorized emergency vehicle may 
engage in conduct permitted by Section 546.001 only when the fire fighter is using visual signals 
(emergency lights). 
(b)  Police vehicles are not required to be equipped with a red light visible from the front. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 147 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(c)  A police officer may operate an authorized emergency vehicle for a law enforcement purpose 
without using audible or visual signals if: 
1) the officer is responding to an emergency call or pursuing a suspected violator of the law with 
probable cause to believe that knowledge of the presence of the officer will cause the suspect to 
destroy evidence or get away; or 
2) Because of traffic conditions on a multilaned roadway, vehicles moving in response to the 
audible or visual signals may increase the potential for a collision or unreasonably extend the 
duration of the pursuit. 
546.005 – Duty of Care 
This chapter does not relieve the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle from:  
1) the duty to operate the vehicle with appropriate regard for the safety of all persons; or  
2) the consequences of reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
546.006 – Designated Emergency Vehicle During Declared Disasters 
DPS may designate certain vehicles as authorized emergency vehicles to aid in disaster response.  Once 
designated, these vehicles may proceed as authorized emergency vehicles if the governor has declared a 
disaster, DPS asks for assistance from that agency, and the vehicle is operated by a member of that 
agency. 
546.007 – Closure of Road or Highway by Firefighter 
This section gives firefighters the authority to close one or more lanes of traffic to protect the safety of 
persons or property.  When doing so, they are required to deploy emergency vehicles equipped with 
proper emergency lights and sirens. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 148 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 5.2 – CHAPTER 547 - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 
BPOC Objective 22.17 – Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to vehicle 
equipment standards and maintenance. 
547.001 – Definitions 
(2-b) Highway maintenance or construction vehicle –  a highway or traffic maintenance or construction 
vehicle used for a variety of roadway maintenance and repair activities – includes motor graders, road 
rollers, excavators, pneumatic tire equipment, movers, and tractors. 
Why is this important?  These vehicles fall under special lighting regulations determined by TXDOT (per 
547.105).  These regulations allow these vehicles to flash blue lights that would otherwise be illegal. 
TXDOT has designated a list of vehicles that should be considered highway maintenance or 
construction vehicles:  
Source:  TXDOT Lighting Standards for Highway Maintenance or Construction Vehicles and Service Vehicles 
(3)  Light transmission – the ratio of the amount of light that passes through a material to the amount of 
light that falls on the material and the glazing (expressed as a percentage of light transmitted). 
Why is this important?  This is the standard used for determining the legality of window tint on 
certain windows in 547.613. 
(5-a) Road Machinery – in order to be “road machinery”, the vehicle must be both designed as 
machinery and “only incidentally operated on the highway”.   
Why is this important?  This definition is important because a person operating a road machine is 
not required to hold a Texas driver’s license (521.027) and road machinery is excluded from most 
equipment requirements found in this chapter (547.002). 
(6)  Safety glazing material – material that prevents a window such as a windshield from shattering and 
reduces the likelihood of injury. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 149 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(6-a) Service vehicle – a highway or traffic maintenance vehicle owned and operated on a highway by or 
for a governmental agency and performs a function requiring the use of a lamp or illuminating device in 
accordance with TXDOT’s lighting standards adopted in 547.105.  Also includes vehicles that have a 
public service function such as utility vehicles and tow trucks. 
TXDOT has designated a list of vehicles that should be considered service vehicles: 
Source:  TXDOT Lighting Standards for Highway Maintenance or Construction Vehicles and Service Vehicles 
Why is this important?  These vehicles fall under special lighting regulations determined by TXDOT (per 
547.105).  These regulations allow these vehicles to flash blue lights that would otherwise be illegal. 
(7) Slow-moving vehicle  
A. a motor vehicle designed to operate at a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour or less, not 
including an electric personal assistive mobility device (i.e. Segway);  or 
B. a vehicle, implement of husbandry, or machinery, that is towed by an animal or a motor vehicle 
designed to operate at a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour or less.  
Why is this important?  These vehicles are required to display a slow moving vehicle emblem 
(547.703) and they are permitted to operate on the improved shoulder (545.058). 
(8) Slow-moving-vehicle emblem – means a triangular emblem that conforms to standards and 
specifications adopted by the director of DPS (done through DPS administrative code). 
Why is this important?  These emblems may only be used in  certain circumstances (547.005) and 
they are required to be used on slow moving vehicles (547.703). 
Administrative Code Title 43, Part 1, Rule 21.9 – Texas adopted the American Society of Agricultural 
and Biological Engineers, Standard S276 as the standard for slow-moving vehicle emblems used in 
Texas. 
(9) Sunscreening device – a film, material, or device that meets the department's standards for reducing 
effects of the sun. 
Why is this important?  Sunscreening devise are regulated in 547.613 – they cannot block too much 
light on certain windows and they cannot reduce or obstruct the driver’s clear view. 
547.002 – Applicability  
Unless a vehicle equipment provision is specifically made applicable, Chapter 547 does not apply to: 
1) an implement of husbandry (except 547.371 and 547.372) 
2) road machinery (defined in 547.001(5-a)) 
3) a road roller (included in “special mobile equipment” definition in 541.201(18)) 
4) a farm tractor (except 547.371 and 547.372) 
5) a bicycle, a bicyclist, or bicycle equipment (governed by 551.104) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 150 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 151 
6) an electric bicycle, an electric bicyclist, or electric bicycle equipment (governed by 551.104) 
7) a golf cart (governed by Chapter 551) 
8) a neighborhood electric vehicle (governed by Chapter 551) 
9) an off-highway vehicle (governed by Chapter 551A) 
 
Apply It: 
 
You come across the farm tractor operating on the highway. 
547.323 says a motor vehicle must be equipped with stop lamps.  
The farm tractor is not equipped with stop lamps. 
547.501 says a motor vehicle must be equipped with a horn.          
The farm tractor is not equipped with a horn. 
547.613 says a windshield may not be tinted.                                      
The farm tractor has dark tint on its windshield. 
How man violations is the operator of the farm tractor committing? 
 
 
547.003 – Equipment Not Affected 
This chapter does not prohibit and the department by rule may not prohibit the use of equipment 
required by an agency of the United States or a part or accessory not inconsistent with this chapter or a 
rule adopted under this chapter. 
Translation: The TRC does not list all permitted equipment and activities.  It only lists required 
equipment and prohibited activities.  When it comes to accessory equipment, the question is not, 
“Where does the Transportation Code say you can have that piece of equipment?”  The question is, 
“Where does the Transportation Code say you can’t have that piece of equipment?”  
Apply It:  
The owner of this truck has been down to the AutoZone 
and you see him driving around with green lights 
glowing under his vehicle. 
You search the Transportation Code and the federal 
lighting standards and you can’t quite put your finger 
on where it specifically says this is a violation.  What 
should you do? 
 
a)  stop him for “Use Equipment Not Approved” because the TRC never says he can have these lights. 
b)  stop him for “Operate Vehicle In Unsafe Condition” because the lights are distracting other drivers. 
c)  stop him and tell him that his lights are illegal.  Release him without a citation because you couldn’t 
find the violation in the ticket writing software. 
d)  Do not stop him because there is no violation.  Buy stock in AutoZone, because once everyone else 
sees these lights they’re going to have to have some, too. 
547.004 – General Offenses 
(a)(1) describes the offense of Drive/Permit To Drive Vehicle In Unsafe Condition So As To Endanger 
Any Person.  This offense occurs when the person operates or moves or, as an owner, knowingly 
permits another to operate or move, a vehicle that is unsafe so as to endanger a person.  This is an 
offense of articulation – an officer must articulate what is unsafe about the vehicle’s condition.  
(a)(2) and (3) describe the offense of Use Equipment Not Approved – the vehicle is not equipped in a 
manner that complies with the vehicle equipment standards and requirements established by this 
chapter or is equipped in a manner prohibited by this chapter.  
Specifically adopted equipment standards can be found in Chapter 21 of the Texas Department of Public 
Safety’s administrative code.  Before taking enforcement action for unapproved equipment, officers 
should be able to identify the applicable equipment standard and how the specific equipment is in 
violation.  
Case law – Carrillo v. State, 235 SW 3d 353, Kennedy v. State (No. 13-12-00668-CR) – courts have held 
that a vehicle driving on a deflated or flat tire could be considered to be in violation of 547.004 and 
548.604.  Note that in each case, officers were able to articulate how the condition of the vehicle was 
unsafe considering the speed the vehicle was traveling, the roadway and traffic conditions, etc.  
547.005 – Offense Relating to Violation of Special-Use Provisions 
(a) A person may not use a slow-moving vehicle emblem on a stationary object or on a non-slow-moving 
vehicle. 
Slow-moving vehicle emblem is defined in 547.001(8) – a triangular emblem that 
conforms to standards and specifications adopted by the director under Section 547.104.  
DPS administrative code adopted the American Society of Agricultural and Biological 
Engineers, Standard S276 as the standard for slow-moving vehicle emblems in Rule 21.9. 
(b) A person may not operate a motor vehicle bearing the words "school bus" unless the vehicle is used 
primarily to transport persons to or from school or a school-related activity. 
547.105 – Maintenance & Service Vehicle Lighting Standards 
This statue gives TXDOT broad authority to regulate the lighting of highway maintenance or construction 
vehicles and service vehicles.  TXDOT has developed lighting standards for these vehicles.  The lighting 
standards can be found on TXDOT’s website:   
https://www.ttsa.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/TxDOT-Equipment-Lighting-Standards_final.pdf 
TXDOT’s lighting standards require flashing amber lights and permit flashing blue lights on highway 
maintenance or construction vehicles and service vehicles in specific circumstances.  Flashing red or 
white lights are prohibited. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 152 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Highway Maintenance or Construction Vehicles 
TXDOT’s lighting specifications for these vehicles are below: 
Reference 547.001 – highway maintenance or construction vehicles are specifically defined. 
Highway maintenance or construction vehicles flashing blue lights outside the parameters described in 
TXDOT’s lighting standards are committing the violation of Improper/Unauthorized Flashing White, 
Red, Blue Lights. 
Highway maintenance or construction vehicles are not permitted to flash white or red lights (547.305). 
Service Vehicles 
TXDOT’s lighting standards also specify certain lighting requirements for some service vehicles: 
Reference 547.001 – service vehicles are specifically defined. 
Service Vehicles flashing red, white, or blue lights outside the parameters described in TXDOT’s lighting 
standards are committing the violation of Improper/Unauthorized Flashing White, Red, Blue Lights. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 153 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Summary – Flashing Lights for Highway Maintenance/Construction Vehicles and Service Vehicles 
Highway Maintenance and Construction Vehicles 
Must flash amber lights and may flash blue lights when: 
1) Removing show and ice 
2) In a mobile operation where work moves continuously or intermittently 
3) When responding to or parked at an incident 
4) When employees must be out of the equipment and in a lane of traffic without channelizing devices 
5) When working on or near the edge of the shoulder outside the protection of a standard work zone 
Flashing amber lights outside these parameters is not a violation. 
Flashing blue lights outside these parameters is a violation Improper/Unauthorized Flashing White, 
Red, Blue Lights. 
Flashing red or white lights when operating on the highway is always a violation for highway 
maintenance or construction vehicles. 
Service Vehicles 
Tow Trucks 
• Must be equipped with roof-mounted amber warning lights 
• May be equipped with flashing red and blue lights, but they may only be used when stopped at an 
incident. A tow truck flashing red or blue lights when not stopped at an incident commits a violation 
for Improper/Unauthorized Flashing Red or Blue Lights 
• Not permitted to have flashing white lights 
Escort Flag Vehicles 
• Must be equipped with roof-mounted amber warning lights 
• May be equipped with flashing blue lights, but the towing vehicle or oversize load may not be 
equipped with flashing blue lights 
• Not permitted to have flashing red or white lights 
Garbage Trucks 
• Must be equipped with flashing amber warning lights 
• May be equipped with flashing blue lights, but they can only be used when removing waste from a 
location adjacent to the highway. A garbage truck flashing blue lights when not picking up garbage 
commits a violation for Improper/Unauthorized Flashing Blue Lights 
• Not permitted to have flashing red or white lights 
All other Service Vehicles (including Utility Service Vehicle) 
• Must display amber warning lights when stationary at an incident 
• May be equipped with flashing blue lights, but lights can only be used when stationary at an incident 
• Not permitted to have flashing red or white lights 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 154 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.301 – General Provisions Relating to Measurements 
(a) A distance requirement for a lamp or device is measured as if the vehicle were unloaded and on a 
straight, level, unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions.   
(b) A mounted height requirement is measured as if the vehicle were unloaded and on level ground and 
is measured from the center of the lamp or device to the ground. 
547.302 – Duty to Display Lights 
(a) A vehicle’s required lights must be activated under either of the following two conditions: 
(1)  at nighttime (541.401(5)  – ½ hour after sunset to ½ hour before sunrise); or 
(2)  when light is insufficient or atmospheric conditions are unfavorable so that a person or vehicle on 
the highway is not clearly discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead. 
(d)  Not more than four of the following may be lighted at one time on the front of a motor vehicle:   
1) headlamps; or  
2) lamps that project a beam with an intensity brighter than 300 candlepower.  
Clarification:  This section describes a violation when more than four of the specified lamps are lit to the 
front.  Enforcement action should not be taken against a vehicle unless the lamps are actually lighted as 
the vehicle is being operated on the highway.  Likewise, accessory lighting that does not project a beam 
with an intensity of more than 300 candlepower do not count towards the “four light” limit. 
547.303 – Color Requirements 
This section governs the color of lamps mounted on the rear of a vehicle. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, a lighting device or reflector mounted on the rear of a vehicle 
must be or reflect red. 
A signaling device mounted on the rear of a vehicle may be red, amber, or yellow.  This would apply to turn signals. 
Apply It: 
This vehicle is traveling down the road displaying a 
white license plate lamp to the rear.  547.303 says 
lighting devices mounted on the rear of the vehicle 
must be red.  Is the operator of this vehicle 
committing a violation? 
YES                                
  NO 
This pickup is traveling down the road with a white 
cargo lamp activated.  Is this a violation of 547.303? 
YES                                
  NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 155 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 156 
  
This vehicle is traveling down the road displaying a green light 
on the rear of the vehicle.  547.303 says lighting devices 
mounted on the rear of the vehicle must be red.  Is the 
operator of this vehicle committing a violation? 
 
                     YES                                  NO 
 
 
 
 
 
This vehicle is traveling down the road displaying a white 
light on the rear of the vehicle.  Is the operator of this vehicle 
committing a violation? 
 
                     YES                                  NO 
 
 
 
 
547.304 – Applicability 
(a) During daytime/good visibility, the following trailers are not required to have fixed electric lights: 
• farm trailers 
• fertilizer trailers registered as a farm trailer  
• a boat trailer with a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or less 
(b)  During daytime/good visibility, a boat trailer with a gross weight of more than 3,000 pounds but 
less than 4,500 pounds is only required to have stop lamps and turn signal lamps (547.323 and 547.324).  
Boat trailers 4,500 pounds or more have the same lighting requirements as any other trailer. 
(c) During daytime/good visibility operation, a mobile home operated under a permit is only required to 
have stop lamps and turn signal lamps (547.323 and 547.324). 
Note:  All of these exceptions are for daytime/good visibility (at least 1000’ of visibility).  At nighttime, all 
of the above vehicles are required to be equipped with the same lighting as any other trailer (side 
marker lamps, taillamps, stop lamps, ID and clearance lamps if over 80” wide, etc.). 
 
547.305 – Restriction on Use of Lights 
(a)  A motor vehicle lamp or illuminating device that projects a beam with an intensity brighter than 300 
candlepower is required to be directed so that no part of the high–intensity portion of the beam strikes 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 157 
the roadway at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.  This does NOT apply to a headlamp, 
spotlamp, auxiliary lamp, turn signal lamp, or emergency vehicle, tow truck, or school bus warning lamp. 
(b) Except as expressly authorized by law, only a police vehicle may have a lamp or device that displays a 
red light visible from directly in front of the center of the equipment or vehicle.  Exceptions include 
authorized emergency vehicles, school/church buses, and tow trucks authorized to be equipped with 
flashing red lights used at specified times. 
 
Flashing/Alternating Red, White, or Blue Lights 
The remainder of 547.305 contains a variety of regulations concerning flashing/alternating red, white, or 
blue lights.  Below is a quick reference table, taken from THP Chief Orlando Alanis’ 2023 guidance 
memo. For the full document, the memo can be accessed on Sharepoint. 
Vehicle Color of Flashing Lights Transportation Code 
Police Vehicles Red/Blue/White/Amber 547.305 & 547.702 
Fire/EMS Vehicles Red/Blue/White/Amber 547.305 & 547.702 
Volunteer Fire/EMS Red/Blue/White/Amber 547.305 & 547.702 
Medical Examiner Vehicle1                     Red/Blue 547.751 
Justice of the Peace2 Red/Blue 547.752 
School Bus Red/White (rooftop)/Amber 547.305 & 547.701 
Highway Maintenance or 
Construction Vehicles3 and 
Service Vehicles4 
Amber/Blue 547.105 & TxDOT 
Lighting Standards 
Airport Security Vehicles5 Amber/Blue 22.091(b) 
Security Patrol Vehicles6 Green/Amber/White 547.305 
Tow Trucks7 Amber/Blue/Red 
547.305, 547.702,  
547.105, & TxDOT Lighting 
Standards 
Escort Flag Vehicles 8         Amber/Blue                              547.305, 623.099 & 
TxDOT Lighting Standards 
Garbage Trucks Amber/Blue 547.305, 547.105 & TxDOT 
Lighting Standards 
Utility Service Vehicles 9 Amber/Blue 203.091, 547.105 & TxDOT 
Lighting Standards 
 
Note: Use of amber lights is not prohibited, therefore any vehicle may flash amber lights if they do not 
inhibit the effectiveness of a required lamp. 
(c)  A person may not operate a motor vehicle equipped with a red, white, or blue beacon, flashing, or 
alternating light unless the equipment is used as specifically authorized by this chapter or a running 
lamp, headlamp, taillamp, backup lamp, or turn signal lamp that is used as authorized by law. Notable 
exceptions are highway maintenance/service vehicles (flashing blue permitted – 547.105), and the 
vehicles described in the remainder of this section.  DPS Arrest Title – Improper/Unauthorized Flashing 
White, Red, or Blue Lights. 
(d)  Alternately flashing lighting equipment described by Section 547.701 or 547.702 (flashing red lights) 
are permitted only if the vehicle is: 
1) a school bus; 
2) an authorized emergency vehicle; 
3) a church bus; 
4) a tow truck while under the direction of a law enforcement officer at the scene of a collision OR 
while hooking up to a disabled vehicle on a roadway; or 
5) a tow truck with a mounted light bar with turn signals and stop lamps in addition to those required by law. 
(e)  A person may not operate a highway maintenance or construction vehicle or service vehicle that is 
not equipped with lamps or that does not display lamps as required by the standards and specifications 
adopted by theTXDOT (reference 547.105).  These standards require a flashing amber light in certain 
circumstances and permit a flashing blue lamp in certain circumstances. DPS Arrest Title – Hwy 
Maintenance or Construction Vehicle/Service Vehicle Not Displaying Required Lamps. 
(e-1) A security patrol vehicle may only be equipped with green, amber, or white lights. 
Note: While (e-1) permits green and amber lights for security patrol vehicles, these colors are 
generally permissible for any vehicle to display.   
(e-2) A motor vehicle is equipped with a lamp or illuminating device under this section regardless of 
whether the lamp or illuminating device is attached to the motor vehicle temporarily or is activated. 
(e-3) An escort flag vehicle may be equipped with alternating or flashing blue and amber lights.  Escort 
flag vehicles are defined in 623.008(1). 
(e-4)  A vehicle described by Section 545.157(a) (Slow Down/Move Over law) may be equipped with 
flashing blue lights (authorized emergency vehicle, tow truck, highway maintenance or construction 
vehicle, utility service vehicle, garbage truck, toll authority contract vehicle). 
FLASHING LIGHTS – THE SUMMARY 
Only flashing/alternating red, white, or blue lights are prohibited by the Transportation Code.  Below is a 
summary of each color and which vehicles may flash these colors in certain circumstances.
 Flashing White Lights  
• Authorized emergency vehicles 
• School bus rooftop beacon 
Flashing Red Lights 
• Authorized Emergency Vehicles 
• School buses 
• Church buses 
• Tow Trucks  
Flashing Blue Lights 
• Authorized Emergency Vehicles 
• TXDOT or Highway Maintenance and 
Construction Vehicles 
• Service Vehicles 
• Utility Service Vehicles 
• Tow Trucks 
• Escort Flag Vehicles 
• Garbage Trucks  
• Medical Examiner/Justice of the Peace 
• Toll Project Vehicles 
• Medical Examiner/Justice of the Peace
 BPOC Student Manual - Page 158 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.306 – LED Ground Effect Lighting Equipment on Motorcycle or Moped 
LED ground effect lighting on motorcycles or mopeds may only be non-flashing amber or white light. No 
other colors are permitted. This section is specific to ground effect lighting on motorcycles and mopeds.   
547.3215 – Use of Federal Standard 
This statue was adopted in 1997 and is retro-active to the date the federal lighting standards were first 
written (model year 1968).  The federal lighting standards reference 49 CFR 571.108. The adoption of 
the federal lighting standard means any vehicle manufactured since 1968 must be equipped with lights 
that conform to the federal manufacturer’s lighting standards in effect at the time the vehicle was 
manufactured, not the standards in the Transportation Code.  Oftentimes the standards are the same 
or very similar, however on issues of light performance, mounting height, color, and number, the federal 
lighting standard controls.   
Resource – THP-68 – this form is a concise synopsis of the federal lighting standards.   
The entirety of the 571.108 lighting standard may be viewed online here. 
Application:  Because Texas adopted the Federal Lighting Standards, when officers are examining a 
specific required lamp and determining if it is the correct color, is mounted at the correct height, and 
otherwise is a “legal” light, they should apply the standards found in 49 CFR 571.108 at the time the 
vehicle was manufactured.  A lamp that is not in compliance with the federal standards constitutes a 
violation in Texas for which law enforcement officers can take enforcement action.  
Example: 
The Texas Transportation Code states headlamps must be mounted from 24 to 54 inches. 
The Federal 108 Lighting Standard states headlamps must be mounted from 22 to 54 inches. 
You are looking at a 2016 Ford Focus with headlamps mounted 23 inches high.  Is this a violation? 
No – because the vehicle was manufactured under the federal lighting standard. 
You are looking at a 1964 Plymouth Barracuda with headlamps mounted 23 inches high.  Is this a 
violation? 
Yes – the vehicle was manufactured before the Federal 108 Lighting Standard was introduced in 
1968.  The headlamps must be mounted according to the specifications in the Transportation Code. 
Impairing the Effectiveness of a Required Lamp 
The Federal 108 Lighting Standards has an important provision in Section 6.2.1, which states, “No 
additional lamp, reflective device, or other motor vehicle equipment is permitted to be installed that 
impairs the effectiveness of lighting equipment required by this standard.” 
A vehicle owner who has added accessory lighting or otherwise equipped their vehicle in a manner that 
impairs the effectiveness of the vehicle’s required lights commits this violation – this would apply to 
vehicle modifications such as smoked taillamp covers, tinted headlamp lenses, stickers or decals 
obstructing the high-mounted stop lamp, a bright accessory light that obscures a side marker lamp, etc. 
The arrest title for this violation is Vehicle Equipped so as to Impair the Effectiveness of Required 
Lamp, FMVSS 571.108. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 159 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.321 – Headlamps Required  
Texas TRC Requirements for Headlamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles) 
A motor vehicle must be equipped with at least two headlamps – one headlamp must be mounted on 
each side of the front of the vehicle and each headlamp must be mounted at a height from 24 to 54 
inches. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Headlamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles 
(MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
547.322 – Taillamps Required 
Because required lamps are address in the Transportation Code AND the Federal 108 Lighting Standard, 
the requirements will be listed separately in this manual. 
Texas TRC Requirements for Taillamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles)  
A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or vehicle that is towed at the end of a combination of 
vehicles shall be equipped with at least two taillamps.  A passenger car or truck that was manufactured 
or assembled before the model year 1960 shall be equipped with at least one taillamp. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 160 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Taillamp Mounting:  on the rear of the vehicle at a height from 15 to 72 inches and at the same 
level and spaced as widely apart as practicable if a vehicle is equipped with more than one lamp.   
Taillamp Color/Visibility:  red light visible at a distance of 1,000 feet from the rear of the vehicle. 
Word Association:  TRC Taillamps   15-72 inches  red  1000 feet 
Case Law – Vicnair v. State, 751 S.W.2d 180 – Some white light is permissible from a cracked taillamp 
lens as long as the lamp still emits red light visible to the required distance. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Taillamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles 
(MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Taillamps for All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1-B 
Texas TRC Requirements for License Plate Lamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles) 
(f) A taillamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed and mounted to emit a white light that illuminates 
the rear license plate and makes the plate clearly legible at a distance of 50 feet from the rear.    
Word Association:  TRC LP Lamp   white light  50 feet 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 161 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standard for License Plate Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger 
Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for License Plate Lamps for All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1B  
License plate Lamp performance in the Federal Lighting Standard: 
FMVSS 571.108, S7.7.15.1 - Each license plate lamp installed on a vehicle other than a motorcycle must 
be of such size and design as to provide illumination on all parts of a 150 mm by 300 mm test plate 
(standard license plate size).  
547.323 – Stoplamps Required 
Texas TRC Requirements for Stoplamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles) 
A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or pole trailer shall be equipped with at least two stoplamps.  A 
passenger car manufactured or assembled before the model year 1960 shall be equipped with at least 
one stoplamp. 
Stoplamp Mounting:  on the rear of the vehicle 
Stoplamp Color:  red or amber light that is visible in normal sunlight at a distance of at least 300 
feet from the rear of the vehicle and displayed when the vehicle service brake is applied.   
Word Association:  TRC stoplamps   two on the rear  red or amber light  300 feet 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 162 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standard for Stop Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles 
(MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Stop Lamps for All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1-B 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 163 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
High-Mounted Stop Lamps 
The Texas TRC does not mention or required high-mounted stop lamps, however the Federal 108 
lighting standard requires this lamp for many vehicles. 
Federal Lighting Standard for High-Mounted Stop Lamps, All Passenger Cars, and on Multipurpose 
Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, Less Than 80 inches in Overall Width and with a GVWR 
of 10,000 Lbs. or Less, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Note: A high-mounted stop lamp has not always been required by the federal lighting standards. See 
effective dates of this requirement below. 
The following are effective dates for the high-mounted stop lamp requirement: 
Passenger Cars – Required if manufactured on or after September 1, 1985. 
MPVs, Trucks, and Buses less than 80” wide and with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less – Required if 
manufactured on or after September 1, 1993. 
MPVs, Trucks, and Buses 80” or more in overall width – not required 
MPVs, Trucks, and Buses with a GVWR of over 10,000 lbs. – not required 
Word Association:  High-Mounted Stop Lamp   passenger car  September 1, 1985 
Word Association:  High-Mounted Stop Lamp   truck/SUV  September 1, 1993 
Word Association:  High-Mounted Stop Lamp   not required  more than 10,000 GVWR or 80” wide 
547.324 – Turn Signal Lamps Required 
Texas TRC Requirements for Turn Signal Lamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles) 
If vehicle is at least 80” wide – visible to a distance of 500 feet to front and rear 
If vehicle is less than 80” wide – visible to a distance of 300 feet to front and rear 
Turn Signal Mounting:  mounted at the same level and spaced as widely apart as practicable on the 
front and on the rear of the vehicle. 
Turn Signal Color:  white or amber light to the front and a red or amber light to the rear. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 164 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Note: While the TRC permits “white or amber” turn signals to the front, the Federal 108 lighting 
standard requires front turn signal lamps to be amber.  A vehicle subject to the federal standards 
(manufactured after 1967) would be in violation if the front turn signals were white. 
Word Association:  TRC turn signal lamp   white or amber to front  red or amber to rear 
Federal Lighting Standard for Turn Signal Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger 
Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Turn Signal Lamp for All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1B 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 165 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Side Marker Lamps 
The Texas Transportation Code does not require side marker lamps on smaller vehicles, however the 
Federal Lighting Standard does – see tables below. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Side Marker Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger 
Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Side Marker Lamps for All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1B 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 166 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.325 – Reflectors Required 
Texas TRC Requirements for Reflectors (standard for pre-1968 vehicles) 
At least two red reflectors on the rear of the vehicle.   
Reflector Mounting:  may be included as a part of a taillamp and shall be mounted at a height from 
15 to 60 inches. 
Reflector Color/Visibility:  Must be red and must be visible at night at all distances from 100 to 600 
feet when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps  
Word Association:  TRC reflectors   15-60 inches  at least 2  red  visible 100 to 600 feet 
Federal Lighting Standard for Reflectors for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles 
(MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Note: Rear reflectors are often incorporated into the 
taillamp lenses. Side reflectors are often incorporated 
into the side marker lamp lenses. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 167 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standard for Reflectors – All Trailers, THP-68, Table 1B 
Note:  Rear reflectors are often incorporated into the taillamp lenses. 
Side reflectors are often incorporated into the side marker lamp 
lenses. 
Backup Lamps (optional in TRC, Required by Federal Standards) 
Federal Lighting Standard for Backup Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles 
(MPV), Trucks, and Buses, THP-68, Table 1-A 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 168 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standard Summary 
If any of the lamps described below are not present, are defective, or are not the required color, a 
violation exits. 
25 Required Lamps or Reflectors 
11 per side, plus 3 (backup lamp, license plate lamp, and high-mounted stop lamp) 
On Each Half of the Vehicle                                                                          
High Beam Headlamp (white)                                        
Low Beam Headlamp (white)                                        
Front Turn Signal (amber)                          
Front Side Marker Lamp (amber) 
Front Side Marker Reflector (amber) 
Rear Side Marker Lamp (red) 
Rear Side Maker Reflector (red) 
Taillamp (red) 
Stop Lamp (red) 
Rear Turn Signal (red or amber) 
Rear reflector (red) 
Plus 3 
Backup Lamp (white) 
License Plate Lamp (white) 
High-Mounted Stop Lamp* (red) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 169 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.326 – Minimum Lighting Equipment Required 
This is the catch-all minimum lighting requirement for a vehicle operated on the highway at night or 
when visibility is reduced below 1000 feet.   
It applies to vehicles that are otherwise not required to have specific lights and even applies to the 
vehicles that are otherwise exempt from Chapter 547 per 547.002 (Applicability).  This section also 
applies to animal drawn vehicles. 
These vehicles shall be equipped at the times specified in Section 547.302(a) (nighttime and when 
visibility is reduced below 1000 feet): 
1) one white lamp visible at a distance of at least 1,000 feet from the front  
2) two red lamps visible at a distance of at least 1,000 feet from the rear; or  
3) one red lamp visible at a distance of 1,000 feet from the rear and two red reflectors visible at a 
distance of 100 to 600 feet to the rear. 
547.327 – Spotlamps Permitted 
Spot lamps are permitted, not required.  A motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than two 
spotlamps.  A spotlamp shall be aimed so that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam strikes 
the windshield, window, mirror, or occupant of another vehicle in use. 
547.328 – Fog Lamps Permitted 
Fog lamps are permitted, not required.  No more than two fog lamps may be present, they must be 
mounted between 12 – 30 inches, and may be used in conjunction with low beam headlamps. 
Fog lamps are not defined in the TRC or in the Federal Lighting Standard, however they are described in 
detail in the SAE J583.  This document was adopted in DPS Admin Code (Rule 21.2) and requires that a 
fog lamp be white or yellow.  Fog lamps of any other color are consider to be the wrong color. 
Word Association:  fog lamps   no more than 2  12-30 inches  white or yellow 
547.330 – Auxiliary Driving Lamps Permitted 
A motor vehicle may be equipped with no more than two auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front 
of the vehicle at a height from 16 to 42 inches.  They may be used with headlamps as long as they are 
used in compliance with 547.333, which requires that the lowermost distribution of light from 
headlamps and auxiliary driving lamps be selected when within 500 feet of an approaching vehicle and 
300 feet when following another vehicle.  The lowermost distribution of light would be low beams on, 
high-beams and auxiliary lamps off.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 170 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
In other words, an LED light bar or other auxiliary driving lamp would have to be mounted between 16 
and 42 inches and it could only be used with the high-beam headlights in situations where high-beam 
headlights are authorized. 
Auxiliary Driving Lamps are not defined in the TRC or the Federal Lighting Standard, however they are 
described by SAE engineering code J-581 (adopted in Texas by administrative code – Title 37, Part 1, 
Rule 21.2).  
Based on the definition for auxiliary driving lamp adopted by administrative code (J581 above), auxiliary 
driving lamps are not intended to be used alone or with lower beam headlamps, therefore such use is 
improper and in violation of 547.330. 
J581 also requires that Auxiliary Driving Lamps be white in color.   
Enforcement Guidance: The THP enforcement guidance for these lamps is that enforcement action 
should only be taken if the lamp is turned on and used improperly.  Lamps that are turned off, even if 
improperly mounted, should not be used as PC for stops. 
Word Association:  auxiliary driving lamps   no more than 2  16-42 inches  white  with high
beams only 
DPS Arrest titles: 
Improper Use Of Auxiliary Driving Lamps 
Too Many (More Than Two) Auxiliary Driving Lamps 
Improperly Placed Auxiliary Driving Lamp 
547.331 – Hazard Lamps Permitted 
Texas TRC Requirements for Hazard Lamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles):   
Hazard lamps are permitted but not required on smaller vehicles (they are, however, required on larger 
vehicles, per 547.352).  Lamps should be visible at a distance of at least 500 feet in normal sunlight and 
shall display simultaneously flashing lights that emit a white or amber light to the front of the vehicle 
and red or amber light to the rear of the vehicle. 
Word Association:  hazard lamps   500’ visibility  white or amber to front  red or amber to rear 
Federal Lighting Standard Requirements for Hazard Lamps, 571.108 - S6.6.2: All vehicles to which this 
standard applies except trailers and motorcycles must be equipped with a vehicular hazard warning 
operating unit.  This device should cause all the turn signal lamps to flash on the vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 171 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.332 – Other Lamps Permitted 
The TRC permits a backup lamp in this section, however the Federal 108 Lighting Standard requires a 
backup lamp – THP-68, Table 1A (p.3).  The lamp must be white and It is a violation for the backup lamp 
to be activated when the vehicle is in forward motion.  Most vehicles are manufactured with two backup 
lamps, however only one is required. 
If a vehicle’s backup lamps are activated when the vehicle is in forward motion, a violation exists. This 
would include any auxiliary or supplemental backup lamps added to the rear of a vehicle. 
This section also permits not more than two white or amber side cowl or fender lamps and not more 
than two white or amber running board lights. 
547.333 – Multiple-beam Lighting Equipment Required 
A headlamp, auxiliary driving lamp, auxiliary passing lamp, or combination of those lamps mounted on a 
motor vehicle shall be arranged so that the operator can select at will between uppermost and 
lowermost distributions of light. 
Uppermost distribution of light – reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of at least 450 feet  
Lowermost distribution of light – reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of at least 150 feet ahead, and 
is aimed so that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam projects into the eyes of an 
approaching vehicle operator. 
High-beam headlamps (uppermost distribution) must be dimmed: 
• When approaching another vehicle within 500 feet from the front. 
• When approaching another vehicle within 300 feet from the rear. 
Word Association:  dim high-beam headlamps   500’ approaching from front (meeting)  300’ 
approaching from rear (following) 
547.334 – Single-Beam Lighting Equipment Permitted 
A single-beam headlamp system (i.e. no high-beam/low-beam) is permitted for farm tractors and motor 
vehicles manufactured before September 4, 1948. 
This single-beam system must reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of 200 feet. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 172 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Lighting Requirements for Larger Vehicles 
547.351 – Applicability 
The next several sections describe additional lighting requirements for larger vehicles – buses, trucks, 
trailers, or semitrailers at least 80” wide and/or at least 30 feet long. 
547.352 – Additional Lighting Equipment Requirements 
Texas TRC Requirements for Hazard Lamps (standard for pre-1968 vehicles):   
1)  Buses, Trucks, Trailers, and Semitrailers at least 80” wide: 
A. Two clearance lamps on the front, one at each side (amber) 
B. Two clearance lamps on the rear, one at each side (red) 
C. Four side marker lamps (two amber at or near the front, two red at or near the rear) 
D. Four side reflectors (two amber at or near the front, two red at or near the rear) 
E. Hazard Lamps 
2)  Buses and Trucks at least 30 feet long:  must be equipped with hazard lamps 
3)  Trailers and Semitrailers at least 30 feet long: 
A. Two side marker lamps, one centrally mounted 
on each side (amber) 
B. Two reflectors, one centrally mounted on each 
side (amber) 
C. Hazard Lamps 
4)  Pole Trailers: 
A. Two side marker lamps, one on each side near the front of the load (amber) 
B. One reflector at or near the front of the load 
C. One combination lamp mounted on the rearmost support (amber to the front, red to the rear) 
D. Hazard lamps if at least 80” wide or 30’ long 
5) Truck Tractors: 
A. Two clearance lamps, one on each side at the front of the cab (amber) 
B. Hazard Lamps if at least 80” wide or 30’ long 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 173 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
6)  A vehicle at least 80 inches wide may be equipped with not more than three front identification 
lamps and not more than three rear identification lamps.  Important:  Although the TRC permits 
these lamps, the Federal 108 Lighting Standard requires them on all vehicles at least 80 inches wide.  
These lamps must be amber to the front and red to the rear.  Truck Tractors are not required to have 
ID lamps on the rear and trailers are not required to have ID lamps on the front. 
State Law Lighting Summary for larger Vehicles 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 174 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standards for Larger Vehicles 
Side Marker Lamps and Reflectors Required on Vehicles at least 30’ in Length 
In addition to the side markers at the front and rear, vehicles at least 30 feet in length are required to 
have additional side markers located near the midpoint of the vehicle. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Intermediate Side Marker Lamps for All Passenger Cars, Multipurpose 
Passenger Vehicles (MPV), Trucks, and Buses, 30 Feet or Longer, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Trailers 30 Feet or Longer, THP-68, Table 1-B 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 175 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Clearance Lamps 
Clearance lamps are only required on buses, multipurpose passenger vehicles (SUVs), trucks, truck
tractors, trailers, and semitrailers with an overall width of 80” or more. Most of these vehicles require 
clearance lamps at the front and the rear, however truck-tractors are only required to have clearance 
lamps on the front. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, and Buses 80” or more in 
Overall Width, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Not required on 
truck tractor 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 176 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Federal Lighting Standard for Trailers 80” or more in Overall Width, THP-68, Table 1-B 
Note: Clearance Lamps are often optically combined with side marker lamps. This is permitted as long as 
the lamp is visible from both directions. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 177 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Identification Lamps  
Although the Texas TRC states that vehicles 80” or more in width “may” be equipped with ID lamps 
(547.352), the Federal Lighting Standard requires ID lamps on most vehicles at least 80” in width 
manufactured after 1967. 
Federal Lighting Standard for Multipurpose Passenger Vehicles, Trucks, and Buses 80” or more in 
Overall Width, THP-68, Table 1-A 
Federal Lighting Standard for Trailers 80” or more in Overall Width, THP-68, Table 1-B 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 178 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Larger Vehicle Lighting Summary – 80 Inches or More in Overall Width, 30 feet or Longer 
547.353 – Color Requirement 
A clearance lamp, identification lamp, side marker lamp, or reflector mounted on the front, on the side 
near the front, or in the center of the vehicle must be or reflect amber.   
A clearance lamp, identification lamp, side marker lamp, or reflector mounted on the rear or the side 
near the rear of the vehicle must be or reflect red.  
547.354 – Mounting Requirements 
Reflectors – 24 to 60 inches (or as high as practicable if the permanent structure is less than 24 inches) 
Rear reflectors may be included as part of the taillamp. 
Clearance Lamps – on the permanent structure to indicate the extreme height and width of the vehicle 
547.355 – Visibility Requirements 
Clearance Lamps, ID lamps, and Side Marker Lamps – all distances between 50 and 500 feet. 
Reflectors – all distances from 100 to 600 feet in lawful headlamps 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 179 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.371 – General Lighting Equipment Requirement 
(a) A farm tractor, self-propelled unit of farm equipment, or implement of husbandry (operated on the 
highway) must have: 
1) at least two headlamps 
2) at least one red lamp visible at a distance of at least 1,000 feet from the rear, mounted as far to 
the left of the center of the vehicle as practicable 
3) at least two red reflectors visible at all distances from 100 to 600 feet  
4) hazard lamps that are lighted and visible in normal sunlight at least 1,000 feet to the rear 
(b) Exception – A farm tractor, self-propelled unit of farm equipment, or implement of husbandry 
manufactured or assembled on or before January 1, 1972, is only required to be equipped with #1-3 
above when operated during 547.302(a) times (nighttime or visibility less than 1000 feet).  #4 (hazard 
lamps) are not required for these older vehicles. 
Reference 622.901 – Farm tractors and implements of husbandry are excepted from the general width 
limitations in Texas (621.201), but only when they are operating during the daytime. A farm tractor or 
implement of husbandry that is wider than 102” should not be operating on the highway at night 
without a permit, even if the vehicle has the lamps described in this section. 
547.372 – Lighting Requirements for Combination Vehicles  
If farm equipment or an implement of husbandry is towed by a farm tractor and the towed object or its 
load extends more than four feet to the rear of the tractor or obscures a light on the tractor, the 
towed object shall be equipped at the times specified by Section 547.302(a) with at least two rear red 
reflectors that are visible at all distances from 100 to 600 feet and mounted to indicate the extreme 
width of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.  Reflective tape or paint may be substituted in the 
correct color. 
If a unit of farm equipment or an implement of husbandry is towed by a farm tractor and extends more 
than four feet to the left of the centerline of the tractor, the towed object shall be equipped at the 
times specified by Section 547.302(a) with a front amber reflector.   
547.381 – Obstructed Lights on Combination Vehicles  
If vehicles are operating in combination and the towed vehicle is obstructing the lamps on the towing 
vehicle, the obstructed lamps on the towing vehicle are not required to function (other than taillamps). 
Note:  The lamps on a vehicle subject to the federal 108 lighting standard (1968 or newer) are always 
required to work.  This section should only be applied to vehicles not subject to the federal lighting 
standard adopted in 547.3215. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 180 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.382 – Lighting Equipment on Projecting Loads 
(a) If a load extends to the rear at least four feet beyond the bed or body of the vehicle during 
547.302(a) times (night/reduced visibility): 
• two red lamps visible from the rear,  
• two red reflectors that indicate the maximum load width visible from the rear, and   
• two red lamps, one on each side, that indicate the maximum overhang visible from the side. 
(b) At all other times, a load that extends beyond the vehicle's sides or more than four feet beyond the 
vehicle's rear shall display red flags that are at least 12 inches square, mark the extremities of the load, 
and are placed where a lamp is required by this section.   
Reference 621.206 – Maximum Extended Length of a Load – generally speaking, a vehicle’s load may not 
extend beyond 4’ to the rear of the vehicle.  Having the load marked in accordance with 547.382 does 
not make a load extension beyond 4’ legal.  There are numerous exceptions to the maximum load length – in these situations, the load must be lighted or marked in accordance with 547.382. 
547.383 – Lighting Requirements on Parked Vehicles 
Parking lamps must emit a white or amber light visible to 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle and a 
red light visible to 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle.  The taillamps serve as the parking lamps to the 
rear. 
The federal 108 lighting standard has specifications for parking lamps – THP-68, Table 1-A  
Parking lamps are required to be used when a vehicle is parked or stopped on a roadway or shoulder at 
a time specified in section 547.302(a) (nighttime or when visibility is reduced below 1,000 feet) unless 
there is sufficient light to reveal a person or vehicle on the highway at a distance of 1,000 feet.   
Headlamps on a parked vehicle are required to be dimmed. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 181 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.401 – Brakes Required 
A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or combination of those vehicles must be equipped with 
brakes that comply with the performance requirements for brakes.  The performance standards can be 
found in 547.408. 
There are exceptions for certain trailers, semitrailers, or pole trailers: 
1) Trailer gross weight is 4,500 or less – no brakes required 
2) Trailer gross weight is between 4,500 and 15,000 pounds – no brakes required if speed does not 
exceed 30 MPH 
3) Trailer gross weight is between 4,500 and 15,000 pounds at speeds over 30 MPH – brakes 
required only on rear axle (this exception comes from 547.402). 
Note: When it comes to trailer brakes and the various weights utilized in these sections, everything is 
“gross weight” – i.e. actual weight.  This makes sense.  The actual weight of the vehicle going down the 
road is what is important when it comes to stopping the vehicle.  Brakes don’t care how much weight a 
vehicle was designed to carry (Gross Vehicle Weight Rating). They just care how much weight they’re 
going to have to stop. 
547.402 – Operation and Maintenance of Brakes 
(a)  Brakes are required to operate on each wheel of a vehicle except for the following vehicles:  
1) special mobile equipment (defined in 541.201(18)) 
2) a vehicle that is towed as a commodity when at least one set of the towed vehicle's wheels is on 
the roadway (saddle mount method);  and  
3) a trailer with a gross weight heavier than 4,500 pounds but not heavier than 15,000 pounds 
drawn at a speed of more than 30 miles per hour is only required to have brakes on both wheels 
of the rear axle. 
(b)  A truck or truck-tractor that has at least three axles is not required to have brakes on the front 
wheels.  If the truck or truck-tractor has at least two steerable axles, brakes must operate on the wheels 
of at least one steerable axle. 
(c)   A trailer with a gross weight of 15,000 pounds or less may use surge or inertia brakes. 
(d)  Brakes shall be maintained in good working order and adjusted to operate on wheels on each side of 
the vehicle as equally as practicable.  Brake performance standards can be found in 547.408. 
547.403 – Service Brakes Required 
“Service Brakes” are the vehicle’s primary brakes.  The vehicle must be designed to have one control 
mechanism to control all the brakes simultaneously.  In other words, when you press the brake pedal all 
of the brakes should operate. 
An additional control device may be used to operate the brakes on the towed vehicle (i.e. an electric 
brake controller). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 182 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.404 – Parking Brakes Required 
The parking brake should operate independently of the service brakes and should be capable of 
operating in case of service brake failure.  It should also be capable of holding the vehicle in a parked 
position regardless of roadway slope.  This section does not apply to a motorcycle or moped. 
547.405 – Emergency Brakes Required 
(d)  A trailer, semitrailer, or pole trailer that is equipped with air or vacuum brakes or that has a gross 
weight heavier than 4,500 pounds must be equipped with brakes that operate on all wheels required to 
have brakes that are promptly applied automatically and remain applied for at least 15 minutes in case 
of a breakaway from the towing vehicle. 
Sec. 547.501 – Audible Warning Devices 
(a)  A motor vehicle is required to be equipped with a horn in good working condition that emits a sound 
audible under normal conditions at a distance of at least 200 feet. 
(b)  A vehicle may not be equipped with and a person may not use on a vehicle a siren, whistle, or bell 
unless the vehicle is a commercial vehicle that is equipped with a theft alarm signal or an authorized 
emergency vehicle that is equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell. 
Note: “siren” “whistle” and “bell” are not defined in the Texas Transportation Code or the 
administrative code.  We are left to rely on “common” definitions for these items, which can make 
enforcement somewhat difficult.  Enforcement action would be appropriate for equipment that mimics 
the siren of an emergency vehicle or the whistle of a train. 
(c) and (d) A horn should only be used to provide warning when necessary to ensure safe operation and 
may not emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. 
Word Association:  Audible warning device   200 feet  no siren, whistle, or bell 
Sec. 547.502 – Visible Warning Devices Required 
A truck, bus, or truck-tractor or a motor vehicle towing a house trailer, when outside an urban district 
or on a divided highway, shall carry in the vehicle: 
During daytime – at least two red flags at least 12 inches square and standards 
to support the flags.  
During nighttime – at least three flares and at least three red-burning fuses, red 
electric lanterns, or portable red emergency reflectors.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 183 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 184 
547.503 – Display of Hazard Lamps 
This section applies only to trucks, buses, truck-tractors, trailers, semitrailers, or pole trailers that are at 
least 80” wide or 30 feet long.  
The operator of one of these vehicles that is stopped on a roadway or shoulder shall immediately 
display vehicular hazard warning lamps, unless the vehicle is: 
1) parked lawfully in an urban district 
2) stopped lawfully to receive or discharge a passenger 
3) stopped to avoid conflict with other traffic 
4) stopped to comply with a direction of a police officer or an official traffic-control device;  or 
5) displays other warning devices as required (red triangles, flares, flags, etc.) 
 
 
547.504 – Display of Devices When Lighted Lamps Required 
This section applies only to vehicles that are at least 80” wide or 30 feet long stopped or disabled on a 
roadway outside an urban district at night or when visibility is reduced below 1000 feet.   
(b)  If stopped in the roadway for more than 10 minutes, warning devices must be displayed in specific 
locations: one at the left rear of the vehicle, one in the center of the lane 100’ behind the vehicle, and 
one in the center of the lane 100’ ahead of the vehicle. 
 
 
(c)  If the vehicle is disabled or stopped for more than 10 minutes on a roadway of a divided highway at 
night or in times of reduced visibility, the warning devices should be placed in a different manner:  one 
at the left rear of the vehicle, one in the center of the lane 100’ behind the vehicle, and one in the 
center of the lane 200’ behind the vehicle. 
 
 
In roadway more than 10 minutes at night 
In roadway on divided highway more than 10 minutes at night 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 185 
547.505 – Display of Devices When Lighted Lamps Are Not Required 
This section applies only to vehicles that are at least 80” wide or 30’ long.  When such vehicles are 
disabled or stopped for more than 10 minutes on a roadway outside an urban district during the 
daytime, the operator shall display two red flags in a specified manner.   
(b)  Daytime – Two way roadways: 
 
 
(c)  Daytime – One way roadways: 
 
 
547.601 – Safety Belts Required 
A motor vehicle required by Chapter 548 to be inspected is required to be equipped with front safety 
belts if safety belt anchorages were part of the manufacturer's original equipment on the vehicle.   
 
547.602 – Mirrors Required 
A motor vehicle is required to be equipped with a mirror located to reflect to the operator a view of the 
highway for a distance of at least 200 feet from the rear of the vehicle. 
Word Association:  mirror required   200 foot view 
 
547.603 – Windshield Wipers Required 
A motor vehicle is required to be equipped with a device that cleans moisture from the windshield.  The 
device shall be maintained in good working condition. 
 
547.604 – Muffler Required 
(a)  A motor vehicle is required to be equipped with a muffler in good working condition that continually 
operates to prevent excessive or unusual noise.   
(b)  A person may not use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device on a motor vehicle 
Reference 541.203(3) – "Muffler" means a device that reduces noise using:  (A)  a mechanical design, 
including a series of chambers or baffle plates, to receive exhaust gas from an internal combustion 
engine;  or (B)  turbine wheels to receive exhaust gas from a diesel engine. 
547.605 – Emission System Required 
The engine and power mechanism of a motor vehicle is required to be equipped and adjusted to 
prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes.   
The owner or operator of a motor vehicle of a model year after 1967 that is equipped with an exhaust 
emission system shall maintain the system in good working condition, shall use the system when the 
motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine is operated, and may not remove the system or a part of the 
system or intentionally make the system inoperable in this state. 
Roadside enforcement of this section is typically taken under (d).  Except when travel conditions require 
the downshifting or use of lower gears to maintain reasonable momentum, a person commits an 
offense if the vehicle: 
1) emits visible smoke for 10 seconds or longer, or  
2) emits visible smoke that remains suspended in the air for 10 seconds or longer before dissipating.   
Word Association:  exhaust emission system   after 1967   10 seconds or longer 
547.606 – Safety Guards or Flaps Required 
This section applies to a vehicle that has at least four tires or at least two super single tires on the 
rearmost axle.  The following vehicles are subject to this section: 
• road tractors 
• trucks (including light trucks) 
• trailers 
• truck-tractors in combination with a semitrailer, or  
• semitrailers in combination with a towing vehicle 
Note: “super single” is defined in this section – a wide-base, single tire that may be used in place of two 
standard tires on the same axle.  Not just a wide tire – it is a wide tire that replaces two standard tires. 
The vehicles described by this section shall be equipped with safety guards or flaps that are of a type 
prescribed by the department and are located and suspended behind the rearmost wheels of the 
vehicle or combination of vehicles within eight inches of the surface of the highway.  
The language “of a type prescribed by the department” means there is administrative code with more 
detail on safety guards/mud flaps. 
Reference Administrative Code – Title 37, Chapter 21, Rule 21.4 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 186 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
The administrative code grants an additional 4” tolerance for the height requirement, effectively 
meaning safety guards/flaps are only required to come within 12” of the roadway surface when the 
vehicle is standing still. 
Administrative Code Standards for Safety Guards/Mud Flaps: 
1) Suspended within eight inches of the surface of the roadway with a tolerance of four inches. 
2) Must be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. 
3) Must be made of material capable of remaining in place while the vehicle is being operated. 
4) Must remain in proper place behind rear wheels and must be rigid enough to prevent debris 
from being transmitted to the windshield of the following vehicle. 
5) Must not be split or torn to the extent that it is ineffective. 
6) May swing upwards and backwards while the vehicle is moving, so long as the safety guard or 
flap continues to block the trajectory of debris. 
Safety Guard/Mud Flap Exceptions 
There are four exceptions to the safety guard/mud flap requirement.  Two are found in 547.606 and 
two are described in the above referenced administrative code.  The vehicles that are not required to 
have safety guards/flaps: 
1) Truck-Tractors operated alone 
2) Pole Trailers 
3) Recreational Vehicles (admin code) 
4) Buses (admin code)  
Apply It: 
Vehicle registered out of state with no safety 
guards/mudflaps. 
Violation 
No Violation 
Tires wider than the safety guards/mud flaps. 
Violation 
No Violation 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 187 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 188 
 
Safety guard made out of chains. 
 
Violation 
 
No Violation 
 
 
 
 
 
Truck Tractor missing a safety guard/mudflap. 
 
Violation 
 
No Violation 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety guard/mudflap measures 10” from the ground 
when vehicle is standing still. 
 
Violation 
 
No Violation 
 
 
 
 
Pole trailer safety guard/mudflap 
measures 18” from the ground when 
vehicle is standing still. 
 
Violation 
 
No Violation 
 
 
10” 
18” 
547.609 – Required Label for Sunscreening Devices 
A sunscreening device must have a label that is legible and contains information 
required by the department on light transmission and luminous reflectance of the 
device. 
If the device is placed on or attached to a windshield or a side or rear window, the 
label must state that the light transmission of the device is consistent TRC 
requirements.  The label must be permanently installed between the material and 
the surface to which the material is applied.  
The label must be installed at least on the driver’s window (not required on each individual window).  
Reference DPS Administrative Code Title 37, Part 1, Rule 21.3(f) 
Reference 547.001(9) – "Sunscreening device" means a film, material, or device that meets the 
department's standards for reducing effects of the sun. 
Note: A person in the business of installing window tint is required to place this label and commits an 
offense if they fail to do so (see 547.613(a-1)). 
547.611 – Use of Certain Video Equipment and Television Receivers 
A motor vehicle may be equipped with video receiving equipment, including a television, a digital video 
disc player, a videocassette player, or similar equipment, only if the equipment is located so that the 
video display is not visible from the operator's seat unless the vehicle's transmission is in park or the 
vehicle's parking brake is applied.   
Exceptions – equipment used: 
1) exclusively for receiving digital information for commercial purposes; 
2) exclusively for a safety or law enforcement purpose; 
3) in a remote television transmission truck;  or 
4) exclusively for monitoring the performance of equipment installed on a vehicle used for safety 
purposes in connection with the operations of a natural gas, water, or electric utility. 
GPS devices are also excluded from this section. 
547.613 – Restriction on Windows 
This is a complicated section that governs both window tint and any other obstruction on the windows 
or windshield.  
Object/Material Obstructs or Reduces Clear View (NOT WINDOW TINT) 
(a)(1) is the offense of placing an object or material on or attached to the windshield or windows that 
obstructs the operator’s clear view.  In order to take enforcement action, the officer must articulate that 
the object obstructed or reduces the operator’s clear view. 
Window Tint/Film 
(a)(2) deals specifically with window tint or other transparent material that alters the color or reduces 
the light transmission.  This subsection essentially says it is illegal to place such material on a vehicle’s 
windshield or windows, however (b) provides numerous exceptions. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 189 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(a-1)  A person who is in the business of installing window tint commits an offense if they do not install 
the label required by 547.609 (stating the tint complies with state standards).  Note that the 
operator/owner does not commit this offense – it is specific to a person “in the business of installing” 
transparent material.  This offense carries a fine up to $1000. 
Exceptions 
(b)  There are numerous exceptions to the regulation of window tint and obstructions this section: 
1) Tint may be installed above the AS1 line on the windshield (or 5” from the top) as long as it has a 
light transmission of 25% or more, and is not red, amber, or blue.  Note: this means tint should 
never be below the AS1 line.  Anything else attached to the windshield (not tint) is not illegal 
unless it obstructs or reduces the operator’s clear view. 
Below AS1 Line – no 
tint allowed 
Above AS1 Line may 
be tinted, but may not 
be red, blue, or amber 
and must have at least 
25% light transmission. 
2) The side windows or wing vent windows of a vehicle to the left or right of the operator may be 
tinted as long as the tint has a light transmission of 25% or more or a luminous reflectance of 
25% or less.   
2-a) The side windows of a vehicle to the rear of the operator can be tinted or obstructed without 
violation regardless of light transmission.   
Side window left or 
right of operator – 
may be tinted, but 
must have 25% light 
transmission 
Side window to the 
rear of the operator 
may be tinted or 
obstructed without 
restrictions 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 190 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
3) The rear window (back windshield/glass) of a vehicle can be tinted or obstructed without 
violation regardless of light transmission as long as the vehicle is equipped with outside mirrors 
on each side of the vehicle. 
4) A rearview mirror should not be considered a violation for obstructing the operator’s view. 
5) An adjustable nontransparent sun visor should not be considered a violation for obstructing the 
operator’s view. 
6) A direction, destination, or termination sign on a passenger carrier should not be considered a 
violation for obstructing the operator’s view as long as the operator can still see approaching 
traffic. 
7) A rear window wiper motor should not be considered a violation for obstructing the operator’s 
view. 
8) A rear trunk lid handle or hinge should not be considered a violation for obstructing the 
operator’s view. 
9) A luggage rack attached to the rear trunk should not be considered a violation for obstructing 
the operator’s view. 
10)  A side window to the rear of the vehicle operator on a multipurpose vehicle (SUV). Note: this 
is old language – all vehicles now have this exception under (2-a) above. 
11) A US or local certificate attached to the window should not be considered a violation for 
obstructing the operator’s view (i.e. a registration insignia). 
12) A motor vehicle not registered in Texas is not subject to this section – this means their 
windows/windshield can be tinted or obstructed without violation. 
13) A window that has received factory coating or tinting in compliance with manufacturer’s 
requirements is not considered to be in violation of this section. 
14) A vehicle that is used regularly to transport passengers for a fee and authorized to operate 
under license or permit by a local authority (buses, taxis, limos, etc.) are not subject to this 
section and can have tinted or obstructed windows.   
15) Law enforcement vehicles are exempt from this section. 
16) Commercial motor vehicles as defined by 644.001 are exempt from this section (these vehicles 
are subject to the federal regulations and window tint is governed for them by the fed regs).    
(d) Tolerance – This section allows for a variance of 3% on the required light transmission of a given 
window.  THP Policy:  Allow 5% before writing a citation (clear cut and substantial violation). 
(e)  Defense to Prosecution – It is a defense to prosecution that the defendant or a passenger in the 
vehicle at the time of the violation is required for a medical reason to be shielded from direct rays of the 
sun.  Officers roadside with a person claiming a medical defense to prosecution for window tint should 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 191 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
request to see a letter from a medical professional.  As with all defenses to prosecution, officers may still 
issue a citation, however if the defense appears to be legitimate a citation is generally not issued.  See 
reference below for more information about the medical exception in DPS administrative code.  Note 
the medical exception still does not allow the windshield to be tinted: 
Administrative Code Title 37, Part 1, Rule 21.3, subsection 21.3:     
(e)  Medical exceptions. 
(1) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a motor vehicle operated by or 
regularly used to transport any person with a medical condition which renders the person 
susceptible to harm or injury from exposure to sunlight or bright artificial light may be equipped, on 
all the windows except the windshield, with sunscreening devices that reduces the light 
transmission values of less than 25%. An untinted film or glaze may be applied to the area below 
the AS-1 line of the windshield of a motor vehicle provided the total visible light transmission is 
not reduced by 5%. Vehicles equipped with sunscreening devices under this medical exception shall 
not be operated on any highway unless, while being so operated, the driver or an occupant of the 
vehicle possesses a signed statement from a licensed physician or licensed optometrist. 
(2) The signed statement from a licensed physician or licensed optometrist shall: 
(A) identify with reasonable specificity the driver or occupant of the vehicle; and 
(B) state that, in the physician's or optometrist's professional opinion, the equipping of the vehicle 
with sunscreening devices is necessary to safeguard the health of the driver or occupant of the 
vehicle. 
Window Tint Summary for Vehicles Registered in Texas 
547.615 – Recording Devices 
This section defines recording devices such as airbag control modules, powertrain control modules, or 
OnStar-type crash information recording and describes the circumstances under which law enforcement 
may retrieve the stored information. 
(c)  Information recorded or transmitted by a recording device may not be retrieved by a person other 
than the owner of the motor vehicle in which the recording device is installed except in one of the 
following four circumstances: 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 192 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
1) With a court order 
2) With the owner’s consent 
3) For the purpose of improving motor vehicle safety if the owner or driver’s identification is not 
disclosed (i.e. vehicle safety researchers studying crash data) 
4) For the purposes of determining the need for emergency medical response in the event of a 
crash (i.e. OnStar or similar on-board assistance). 
DPS Guidance regarding “recording device” downloads: 
547.616 – Radar Interference Devices; Offense 
A person may not use, attempt to use, install, operate, or attempt to operate a radar interference 
device in a motor vehicle operated by the person.  
This is a device that actively jams or disables radar.  Passive devices like radar detectors do not meet the 
definition of radar interference devices and do not constitute a violation of this section. 
547.617 – Motorcycle Footrests and Handholds Required 
This section requires that a motorcycle or moped that is designed to carry more than one person be  
equipped with footrests and handholds for use by the passenger. 
This section does not apply to an autocycle or a fully enclosed “motorcycle” as defined in 521.001(a)(6
a). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 193 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.618 – Equipment Required for Certain Automated Motor Vehicles   
(b)  An automated motor vehicle that is designed to be operated exclusively by the automated driving 
system for all trips is not subject to motor vehicle equipment laws or regulations of this state that:  
1) relate to or support motor vehicle operation by a human driver; and 
2) are not relevant for an automated driving system.  
Example:  Motor vehicles are required to be equipped with at least one mirror.  An automated motor 
vehicle that never has an actual human driver, however, may have no need for a mirror because the 
vehicle is equipped with multiple cameras providing necessary views.  The vehicle is not in violation for 
having no mirror because there is no human driver to use the mirror. 
(c) If a vehicle safety inspection is required for the operation of a vehicle described by Subsection (b), 
the vehicle shall automatically be considered to pass the inspection with respect to any equipment from 
which the vehicle is exempt under Subsection (b). 
Reference 545.451 – Automated motor vehicle definition. 
547.701 – Additional Equipment for School Buses 
(a) Required Equipment for School Buses 
1) convex mirror – to see the area directly in front of the bus 
2) red flashing signal lamps in a prescribed configuration – two to the front, two to the rear, visible 
to a distance of 500 feet.     
(b) Permitted Equipment for School Buses (may be equipped, but not required) 
1) rooftop warning lamps – a white strobing warning lamp. 
2) movable stop arms – deployed in conjunction with the flashing red lights 
(c)  Flashing warning lights and other equipment MUST be used when a school bus is being stopped or is 
stopped on a highway to permit students to board or exit the bus.  
(c-1) Operating bus warning lights outside of loading/unloading children on a highway is prohibited. 
(e)  A bus that is a model year of 2018 or later and operated by or contracted for use by a school district 
for the transportation of schoolchildren shall be equipped with a three-point seat belt for each 
passenger, including the operator.  This requirement does not apply if the board of trustees for the 
school district determines that the district's budget does not permit the district to purchase a bus that is 
equipped with the seat belts required by this subsection and votes to approve that determination in a 
public meeting. 
Note:  Although most new school buses are required to be equipped with safety belts, the bus 
passengers are not required to be buckled by state law (only the operator must be buckled).  This is 
because a school bus does not meet the definition of a “passenger vehicle” utilized in 545.412 and 
545.413.   
547.7012 – Requirements for Multifunction School Activity Buses 
Multifunction School Activity Buses may not be painted National School Bus Glossy Yellow.       
BPOC Student Manual - Page 194 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Reference 541.201(11-a) – definition of Multifunction School Activity Bus 
Note:  There is no prohibition against any other type of vehicle being painted this color.  Remember, a 
multi-function school activity bus is built according to the same standards as a school bus, so painting it 
the same color as a school bus could lead to confusion. 
547.702 – Additional Equipment Required for Authorized Emergency Vehicles 
(a) and (b) An authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell 
audible to a distance of at least 500 feet and shall use it when necessary to warn other vehicle operators 
or pedestrians of the approach of the emergency vehicle. 
(c)  An authorized emergency vehicle shall be equipped with flashing red signal lamps displayed in a 
specific manner – as high and widely spaced as practicable displaying four alternately flashing lights (2 to 
the front, 2 to the rear) visible at 500 feet.  
(c-1) Authorized emergency vehicles may also be equipped with flashing or alternating white lights. 
(d)  A private vehicle operated by a volunteer firefighter responding to a fire alarm or a medical 
emergency is not required to be equipped with signal lamps that comply with this section, however per 
546.004 this vehicle may only engage in permissible conduct (speeding, disregarding traffic signals, etc.) 
if equipped with an emergency light. 
(f)  A police vehicle may, but is not required to, be equipped with signal lamps that comply with this 
subsection (four alternately flashing red signal lamps).  This allows for police vehicles to use a variety of 
emergency lights.  
Reference 546.003 and 546.004 – sections describing when this emergency equipment should be used.  
547.703 – Additional Equipment Requirements for Slow Moving Vehicles 
(a)  A slow-moving vehicle must display a slow-moving-vehicle emblem that has a 
reflective surface designed to be clearly visible at a distance of at least 500 feet.  The 
emblem must be mounted base down on the rear of the vehicle and at a height that 
does not impair the visibility of the emblem, and is maintained in a clean, reflective 
condition.  
(b)  This requirement does not apply to a vehicle that is used in construction or maintenance work and is 
traveling in a construction area. 
(c)  If a motor vehicle displaying a slow-moving-vehicle emblem tows machinery or an implement of 
husbandry, the towed unit is not required to display a slow-moving-vehicle emblem as long as the 
visibility of the emblem on the towing vehicle is not obstructed 
(d)  Golf carts, NEVs, and Off-Highway vehicles operated at a speed of not more than 25 MPH are 
required to display this emblem (when operated on the highway, not private property). 
Reference 547.001 – "Slow-moving vehicle" means: a motor vehicle designed to operate at a maximum 
speed of 25 miles per hour or less, or a vehicle, implement of husbandry, or machinery that is towed by 
an anima a motor vehicle designed to operate at a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour or less. 
Reference Texas Administrative Code Title 37, Part 1, Rule 21.9 – standards for SMV emblems. 
Reference 547.005(a) – slow moving vehicle emblems should not be used on stationary objects.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 195 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
547.801 – Lighting Equipment (motorcycles) 
(a)  A motorcycle or a moped must be equipped with: 
(1)  not more than two headlamps mounted at a height from 24 to 54 inches 
(2)  at least one taillamp mounted at a height from 20 to 72 inches 
(3)  a taillamp or separate lamp to illuminate the rear license plate 
(4)  at least one stop lamp 
(5)  at least one rear red reflector 
The TRC does not require turn signals on motorcycles, however the Federal 108 Lighting Standard 
adopted in 547.3215 requires turn signals and additional reflectors on motorcycles.  THP-68, Table 1-C 
The Federal 108 lighting standard requires the same equipment as above, and additionally requires: 
(6) two amber turn signal lamps at or near the front 
(7)  two amber or red turn signal lamps at or near the rear 
(8) two amber reflectors on the side of the motorcycle at or near the front 
(9) two red reflectors on the side of the motorcycle at or near the rear 
Note:  it is common for motorcycles to combine 
lamps on the rear of the vehicle.  The single 
lamp pictured here meets the requirements for 
a taillamp, brake lamp, rear red reflector, and 
license plate lamp. 
(b)  Motorcycles are required to have multi-beam headlamps (high beam/low beam) with an exception 
for smaller motorcycles (250 cc’s or less) and mopeds. 
(d)  A motorcycle may not be operated at any time unless at least one headlamp on the motorcycle is 
illuminated.  This does not apply to a motorcycle manufactured before the model year 1975. 
MC Headlamp Modulators – Motorcycles equipped with headlamp modulators that rapidly vary the 
intensity of the headlamp to increase conspicuity are not in violation for displaying a flashing white lamp 
because the headlamp is not turned off and on as it modulates.  These modulators are permitted by the 
Federal 108 Lighting Standard (S10.17.5). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 196 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 5 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
Chapter 546 
1. Which of the following situations does not permit an authorized emergency vehicle to disregard a 
red traffic signal? 
a.  a police officer catching up to a violator for a routine traffic stop 
b.  a volunteer firefighter in his personal vehicle responding to a fire alarm with red flashing lights 
c.  a police officer escorting an oversized load 
d.  a physician responding to the hospital in an emergency 
e.  all are permitted to disregard a red traffic signal 
2. The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle may proceed past a red light or stop sign, but only 
after _____________________________. 
a.  Changing the siren tone to draw attention 
b.  Yelling “clear” loudly so the in-car video records the fact that he visually cleared the intersection 
c.  Slowing down 
d.  Slowing as necessary for safe operation 
3. An authorized emergency vehicle engaged in the conduct described in 546.001 must be utilizing 
emergency lights and siren without exception. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
Chapter 547 
4. A slow moving vehicle is designed to operate at a maximum speed of _________________. 
5. A slow moving vehicle emblem may be displayed on: 
a.  A driveway entrance 
b.  A farm implement with a maximum speed of 30 MPH 
c.  A horse-drawn carriage with an energetic horse capable of traveling 28 MPH 
d.  A vehicle operated by an old woman who refuses to drive faster than 25 MPH 
6. The lighting standards adopted by TXDOT for highway maintenance and construction vehicles and 
service vehicles can permit these vehicles to flash lights that are prohibited by other sections of the 
Transportation Code. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
7. A vehicle’s required lamps must be activated in what two circumstances? 
1.  ______________________________________________________________ 
2.  ______________________________________________________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 197 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
8. What color would be prohibited for a signaling device mounted on the rear of a vehicle? 
a.  White 
b.  Red 
c.  Amber 
d.  Yellow 
9. A farm trailer operated at nighttime is not exempt from any of the lighting requirements. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
10.  A person may not operate a motor vehicle equipped with a red, white, or blue beacon, flashing, or 
alternating light unless the equipment is: 
a.  Used as specifically authorized 
b.  Used only for off road purposes 
c.  Marked as a DOT approved “novelty lamp” 
d.  Only used in an emergency 
e.  All of the Above 
11. A boat trailer with a gross weight of 4,700 pounds is exempt from the lighting requirements if used 
during the daytime with good visibility. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
12. According to the Transportation Code, a headlamp must be mounted at a height of ______________ 
inches.  According to the Federal 108 Lighting Standard, a headlamp must be mounted at a height of 
_____________ inches. 
13. You stop a 2020 Honda Civic for a defective high-mounted stop lamp.  The driver is intoxicated.  
Three months later, you are in a suppression hearing and the defense attorney places a TRC book in 
front of you on the stand and says, “Show me where it says my client has to have a high-mounted 
stop lamp.”  What do you do? 
a.  Turn to 547.323.  Read.  Panic because it doesn’t say anything about high-mounted stop lamps. 
b.  Say, “The Transportation Code is an ancient and confusing document that you couldn’t possibly 
understand, but trust me – it’s in there.” 
c.  Turn to 547.3215 and explain that Texas adopted the Federal Lighting Standard that requires this 
lamp. 
d.  Explain that it is a violation any time a light placed on a vehicle by the manufacturer is defective. 
14. A passenger car manufactured after ________________________ must have a high-mounted stop 
lamp. 
15. A pickup manufactured after _________________________ must have a high-mounted stop lamp. 
16. A vehicle with a GVWR of 12,000 is not required to have a high-mounted stop lamp. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 198 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
17. A tail lamp must be the color _______________ and must be mounted at a height of 
______________ inches. 
18. According to the TRC, turn signals on the front of a vehicle must be ________________ or 
____________________ .  Turn signals on the rear of a vehicle must be ________________ or 
____________________. 
19. A vehicle may be equipped with no more than __________ auxiliary driving lamps. 
20. An operator must dim headlamps within ___________ feet of a vehicle approaching from the front 
and ______________ feet of vehicle being approached from the rear. 
21. Clearance and side marker lamps are required on all buses, trucks, trailers, and semitrailers at least 
______________ wide. 
22. A motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn in good working condition that emits a sound audible 
under normal conditions at a distance of at least __________ feet:   
a.  100 
b.  200 
c.  400 
d.  500 
23. A truck tractor more than 80” wide that is stopped on a roadway must _________________ display 
hazard lamps.  Additional warning devices must be displayed if the vehicle is stopped for more than 
_________________ minutes. 
24. An exhaust emission system is considered to be defective if the vehicle is emitting smoke for longer 
than ___________________ under normal driving conditions. 
25. The Transportation Code requires safety guards/mudflaps to be suspended within ________ inches 
of the ground.  Administrative Code allows a tolerance of __________ additional inches. 
26. List the four vehicles that are excepted from the safety guard/mudflap requirements. 
1.  _______________________________________ 
2.  _______________________________________ 
3.  _______________________________________ 
4.  _______________________________________ 
27. The window tint law does not apply to a side window behind the vehicle operator. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
28. The obstructed view/window tint law does not apply to a vehicle that is not registered in Texas. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 199 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
29. It is a violation to paint any vehicle National School Bus Glossy Yellow unless the vehicle is a school 
bus. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
30. School buses are required to be equipped with movable stop arms and rooftop warning lamps. 
a.  True 
b.  False 
31. A slow-moving vehicle shall display a slow-moving emblem that:   
a.  is mounted base down on the rear of the vehicle 
b.  has a reflective surface designed to be clearly visible at a distance of 500 feet 
c.  is maintained in a clean reflective condition 
d.  all of the above 
d.  B and C Only 
32. Motorcycles are required to have the headlamp illuminated at all times, even during the day.  The 
only exception is a motorcycle manufactured before the model year ______________. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 200 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 6 – TRC CHAPTERS 548 – 551A 
SECTION 6.1 – CHAPTER 548 – COMPULSORY INSPECTION OF VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.17 – Given a driving situation, determine if a violation exists as it applies to vehicle 
equipment standards and maintenance. 
Important Changes Effective January 1, 2025 
HB 3297 was passed during the 88th Legislative Session and repeals most aspects of the non-commercial 
vehicle safety inspection program. Non-commercial vehicles will not have to undergo a safety 
inspection after January 1, 2025. The commercial motor vehicle inspection program is unaffected.  
Vehicles registered in counties subject to emissions inspection under the state’s air quality state 
implementation plan will still have to undergo an emissions check within 90 days prior to registration.  
548.001 – Definitions  
(1)  Commercial motor vehicle – a self-propelled or towed vehicle (other than a farm vehicle with a 
gross weight, registered weight, or gross weight rating of less than 48,000 pounds), that is used on a 
public highway to transport passengers or cargo if: 
A. the vehicle or combination of vehicles has a gross weight, registered weight, or gross weight 
rating of more than 26,000 pounds; 
B. the vehicle is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers, including the driver; or 
C. the vehicle is used to transport hazardous materials in a quantity requiring placarding. 
Note:  A farm vehicle with a gross weight, registered weight, or gross weight rating of less than 
48,000 pounds is NOT considered a commercial motor vehicle by this definition. 
Why is this important?  Chapter 548 requires a different inspection process for CMVs (548.201). 
548.051 – Vehicles and Equipment Subject to Inspection  
Aside from the exceptions described in 548.052, motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers, pole trailers, or 
mobile homes (RVs) registered in Texas must have an annual safety inspection performed. Prior to 
issuing normal annual registration in Texas, DMV is required to verify that the vehicle has been inspected 
(548.256). 
This section lists fifteen items that are inspected as part of the process:  
1) tires 
2) wheel assembly 
3) safety guards or flaps, if required 
4) Brake system 
5) steering system 
6) lighting equipment 
7) horns and warning devices 
8) mirrors 
9) windshield wipers 
10) sunscreening devices 
11) front seat belts 
12) exhaust system (not required on EVs) 
13) exhaust emission system (not EVs) 
14) fuel tank cap (not EVs) 
15) emissions control equipment (not EVs)
 BPOC Student Manual - Page 201 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Note:  Vehicle items are inspected based on standards and procedures established in the VI-87 
Inspection Manual.  This manual is a procedural manual for motor vehicle inspection stations, not a 
reference for roadside enforcement by peace officers.  Items that may disqualify a vehicle from 
passing a state inspection such as worn tires may not necessarily constitute a violation of the Texas 
Transportation Code. 
(b)  A moped is subject to inspection in the same manner as a motorcycle, except that the only items 
of equipment required to be inspected are the brakes, headlamps, rear lamps, and reflectors. 
Discussion:  A vehicle inspection is required for vehicles bearing 72 and 144-hour permits, 30 Day 
Permits, and Buyer’s Temporary Tags.  If one of these vehicles is encountered without an inspection, 
the offense is Operate Vehicle Without Required Inspection.  Inspection status can be checked at 
MyTXCar.org. 
548.052 – Vehicles Not Subject to Inspection 
The following vehicles are not subject inspection: 
1) a trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or mobile home moving under or bearing a current factory
delivery license plate or current in-transit license plate 
2) a vehicle moving under or bearing a paper dealer in-transit tag, machinery license, disaster 
license, parade license, prorate tab, one-trip permit, vehicle temporary transit permit, antique 
license, custom vehicle license, street rod license, temporary 24-hour permit, or permit license 
3) a trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer, or mobile home having an actual gross weight or registered 
gross weight of 7,500 pounds or less 
4) farm machinery, road-building equipment, a farm trailer, or a vehicle required to display a 
slow-moving-vehicle emblem 
5) a former military vehicle 
6) a vehicle qualified for a tax exemption under Section 152.092, Tax Code (bought in Texas but 
transported out of state prior to registration). 
7) a vehicle for which a title has been issued but that is not required to be registered 
From the list above, the most commonly encountered vehicles that are exempt from inspection 
requirements are:  (focus study here) 
• Trailers with an actual weight or registered weight of 7,500 pounds or less 
• Farm trailers 
• Dealer Temporary Tags 
• Vehicles bearing machinery license plates 
• One-Trip Permits 
Apply It: 
You stop a truck tractor bearing this 72-Hour permit.  The permit 
is current and checks out through the DMV database.  You run the 
vehicle’s VIN through MyTXCar.org and find that it has not been 
inspected in the past three years. 
Is the operator committing a violation?           
YES       
     NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 202 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
You stop a pickup hauling this trailer registered in Texas.  
You run the trailer through MyTXCar.org and find that it has 
never been inspected.  The trailer’s registered weight is 
showing 7,500 pounds. 
Is the operator committing a violation?         
YES         
NO 
You stop a pickup hauling this trailer registered as a 
farm trailer in Texas.  You run the trailer through 
MyTXCar.org and find that it was last inspected four 
years ago.  The trailer’s registered weight is 34,000 
pounds. 
Is the operator committing a violation?      
SECTION 6.2 – CHAPTER 550 – COLLISIONS AND COLLISION REPORTS 
YES      
   NO 
BPOC Objective 22.30 – Illustrate a working knowledge of the laws, methods, and techniques relative 
to crash investigation to include when and where the TC applies in crash investigation. 
550.001 – Applicability of Chapter 
Chapter 550 applies to some places where most of the TRC does not apply.  This means crashes can be 
reported in areas like parking lots and almost any other place open to the public.   
Chapter 550 applies to: 
(1)  Roads owned and controlled by a water control district 
(2)  Private access ways or parking areas provided for a client by a business (other than private 
residential property or parking garages/lots where a fee is charged for parking) 
(3) A highway or other public place 
Highway (541.302) – the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any 
part of which is open to the public for vehicular transport. 
Public Place (PC 1.07) – any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has 
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, 
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
550.021 – Collision Involving Personal Injury or Death (Fail to Stop and Render Aid – Felony) 
(a)  This statue describes a driver’s responsibilities when they have been involved in a collision that 
results or is reasonably likely to result in injury to or death of a person.  Drivers are required to: 
(1)  Immediately stop at the scene 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 203 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(2)  Immediately return to the scene if they were not able to initially stop 
(3)  Immediately determine if a person is involved 
(4)  Remain at the scene until they comply with requirements to give info to other parties involved 
(b)  An operator required to stop should do so without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(c)  The level of offense depends on the nature of injuries suffered by others during a crash: 
• Death – 2nd Degree Felony 
• Serious Bodily Injury – 3rd Degree Felony (SBI is defined in Penal Code 1.07) 
• Other injuries – 3rd Degree Felony (reduced confinement and fine from normal 3rd degree felony) 
Note:  This section and the next few sections use the phrase “involved in a collision”.  These offenses 
could be filed against a non-contact unit that contributed to a crash and fled the scene.  There is no 
requirement for a vehicle to actually collide with another vehicle.  The requirement is simply that the 
vehicle be “involved” in the crash (see Gillie v. State, 181 S.W. 3rd, 768). 
Does the driver have to know he was involved in the crash?  Yes.  Although there is not a culpable 
mental state attached to this offense in the statute, the courts have held that, based on the way this 
section was adopted from other law, a driver must have knowledge that a crash occurred as an element 
of this offense (see Baker v. State, 974 S.W.2d 750(1998); Goss v. State, 582 S.W.2d 782; Mayer v. State). 
550.022 – Collision Involving Damage to Vehicle (Fail to Stop and Render Aid – Misdemeanor) 
(a)  This statute describes a driver’s responsibilities when they have been involved in a collision that 
does not cause injuries but does involve another vehicle that is driven or attended by a person.  Drivers 
are required to: 
(1)  Immediately stop at the scene 
(2)  Immediately return to the scene if they were not able to initially stop 
(3)  Remain at the scene until they comply with requirements to give info to other parties involved  
(b) If a collision occurs on a freeway in a metropolitan area and each vehicle involved can be normally 
and safely driven, each operator shall move the operator's vehicle as soon as possible to minimize 
interference with freeway traffic (“normally and safely driven” is defined in subdivision (d)). 
Reference 541.101 – "metropolitan area" means an area that: (1)  contains at least one municipality 
with a population of at least 100,000;  and (2)  includes the adjacent municipalities and 
unincorporated urban districts. 
Reference 541.302(3) – "Freeway" means a divided, controlled-access highway for through traffic. 
(c)  Failure to comply with this section depends on the amount of damage caused: 
• Damage less than $200 – Class C Misdemeanor 
• Damage $200 or more – Class B Misdemeanor 
550.023 – Duty to Give Information and Render Aid 
Any person involved in a crash with a vehicle that is driven or attended by a person is required to 
provide name, driver license number, address, registration, and insurance information to the other 
parties involved in the crash.   
Operators involved in such crashes are also required to render aid or make arrangements for medical aid 
for other parties involved in the crash (generally this means call 911). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 204 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
550.024 – Duty on Striking Unattended Vehicle 
An operator who strikes another vehicle that is not driven or attended by a person (a parked vehicle) 
must immediately stop and attempt to locate the owner of the vehicle.   
If the owner cannot be located, the operator is required to leave their information in a conspicuous 
place on the vehicle.   
Failure to comply with this section depends on the amount of damage caused: 
• Damage less than $200 – Class C Misdemeanor 
• Damage $200 or more – Class B Misdemeanor 
550.025 – Duty on Striking Structure, Fixture or Highway Landscaping 
An operator who strikes fixtures, structures, or landscaping adjacent to a highway during a crash is 
required to make reasonable efforts to locate and notify the owner of the damaged property and 
provide identifying information. 
Failure to comply with this section depends on the amount of damage caused: 
• Damage less than $200 – Class C Misdemeanor 
• Damage $200 or more – Class B Misdemeanor 
550.026 – Immediate Report of Collision 
If an operator is involved in a crash resulting in injuries or death, or in damage to a vehicle so that it 
cannot be normally or safely driven, they must immediately notify law enforcement of the crash.   
Note:  these are the only circumstances a person is required to report a crash to authorities. 
Fleeing the Scene of a Collision – The Summary 
• Someone is injured or killed – FSRA Felony (550.021) 
o Killed – F2 
o SBI – F3 
o Other injury – F3 (lower fine and confinement period) 
• Someone is with the other vehicle but not injured – FSRA Misdemeanor (550.022) 
o Less than $200 – MC 
o $200 or more – MB 
• Struck Unattended Vehicle – Duty Upon Striking Unattended Vehicle (550.024) 
o Less than $200 – MC 
o $200 or more – MB 
• Damaged structures or fixtures on/adjacent to highway – Duty Upon Striking Highway Fixture 
(550.025) 
o Less than $200 – MC 
o $200 or more – MB 
• Any circumstance where there is injury, death, or a vehicle that cannot be normally and safely 
driven – Fail to Report Collision to Authorities (550.026) 
o Class C Misdemeanor 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 205 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
550.041 – Investigation by Peace Officer 
(a)  Peace officers notified of crashes may investigate the crash and file justifiable charges if the crash 
involves injury or death, or property damage to an apparent extent of at least $1000 regardless of 
whether the crash occurred on property to which this chapter applies.   
Note:  The language in this section regarding filing charges gives peace officers the authority to file 
charges for violations they did not witness firsthand.  Evidence of the violation is established through 
the crash investigation.   
(b)  Where is a crash not investigable? There are only two locations where a crash is not considered to 
be investigable under the TRC’s authority even if it causes injury or damage in excess of $1000: 
1) privately owned residential parking areas; and  
2) privately owned parking lots where a fee is charged for parking or storing vehicles.   
Crashes that occur in these locations are not considered investigable motor vehicle crashes.  They may 
still be investigated by peace officers as injury or death inquiries for possible Penal Code criminal 
culpability, but the authority for such investigations is not derived from the Transportation Code.  
550.062 – Officer’s Collision Report 
A law enforcement officer who in the regular course of duty investigates a motor vehicle collision shall 
make a written report of the collision if the collision resulted in injury to or the death of a person or 
damage to the property of any one person to the apparent extent of $1,000 or more. 
(b)  This report must be submitted no later than the 10th day after the crash date. 
The requirement to report under this section only applies to places described in Chapter 550.001 
(applicability of this chapter): 
(1)  Roads owned and controlled by a water control district 
(2)  Private access ways or parking areas provided for a client by a business (other than private 
residential property or parking garages/lots where a fee is charged for parking) 
(3) A highway or other public place 
• Highway (541.302) – the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any 
part of which is open to the public for vehicular transport. 
• Public Place (PC 1.07) – any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has 
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, 
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Investigating vs. Reporting 
Peace officers are given broad authority to investigate crashes in 550.041, even in locations where 
TXDOT does not consider the crash to be a reportable motor vehicle collision.  These events can still be 
investigated, however a crash report is not submitted to TXDOT. 
Investigate – a peace officer interviews witnesses and drivers, collects/evaluates evidence, and 
files justifiable charges. 
Report – a peace officer submits a CR-3 to TXDOT. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 206 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
To Summarize 
550.041 grants peace officers the authority to investigated crashes anywhere except private residential 
parking areas or privately owned parking lots where a fee is charged for parking. 
550.062 and 550.001 require that a report be submitted to TXDOT if the crash occurred on roads owned 
by a water control district, private access ways or parking areas provided for a client by a business, 
highways, or other public places. 
Crashes that are investigated in locations not described by 550.001 are not required to be reported to 
TXDOT. 
550.063 – Report on Appropriate Form 
Written collision reports must be on the form approved by TXDOT (see 550.064). 
550.064 – Collision Report Forms 
This section directs TXDOT to establish a crash reporting form to provide to law enforcement.  The CR-3 
crash report complies with this section. 
SECTION 6.3 – CHAPTER 551 – OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND MOPEDS, GOLF CARTS, AND OTHER LOW
POWERED VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.18 – Recognize the regulations relating to operation in municipalities and certain 
counties. 
BICYCLES 
551.001 – Applicability 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, this chapter only regulates bicycles operated on a highway or a 
path set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles. 
551.002 – Mopeds and Electric Bicycles Included 
Mopeds (541.201) and Electric Bicycles (664.001) are treated like bicycles for the purposes of subtitle C. 
551.101 – Rights and Duties 
A person operating a bicycle has the rights and duties applicable to a driver operating a vehicle, unless a 
provision of the law alters a right or duty or a right or duty by its nature cannot apply to a person 
operating a bicycle.   
Example of this concept:  Bicycles must stop at stop signs like any other vehicle, but bicycles that are left 
unattended are not required to have keys removed and a parking brake set because bicycles do not 
have ignitions or parking brakes.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 207 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
551.102 – General Operation 
(a)  A person riding a bicycle is required to ride only on or astride a permanent and regular seat attached 
to the bicycle (offense – Ride Bicycle Improperly). 
(b)  A person may not use a bicycle to carry more persons that the bicycle is designed or equipped to 
carry (offense – Ride Bicycle Improperly – Too Many). 
(c)  A person may not use the bicycle to carry an object that prevents the person from operating with at 
least one hand on the handlebars (offense – Carry Articles so as to Interfere with Handling of Bicycle).   
Note: riding with no hands on the handlebars is not a violation unless the person is carrying an object 
that prevents them from placing a hand on the handlebars. 
(d) It is an offense to attach a bicycle, coaster, sled, toy vehicle, or person on roller skates to a vehicle or 
street car. 
Note:  The person on the bicycle, coaster, sled, toy vehicle, or on roller skates is the one who 
commits the offense, not the operator of the vehicle pulling them. 
551.103 – Operation on Roadway 
A person operating a bicycle on a roadway who is moving slower than the other traffic on the roadway is 
required to ride as near as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway.   
Bicycles are permitted to move from the right edge of the roadway in the following circumstances: 
(1)  the person is passing another vehicle moving in the same direction;  
(2)  the person is preparing to turn left at an intersection or onto a private road or driveway; 
(3)  a condition of the roadway prevents the person from safely riding next to the right curb or edge of 
the roadway; 
(4)  the person is operating a bicycle in an outside lane that is less than 14 feet in width and does not 
have a designated bicycle lane adjacent to that lane or is otherwise too narrow for a bicycle and a 
motor vehicle to safely travel side by side.  The term “outside lane” implies that there are at least 
two lanes moving in the same direction. 
The bicyclist can use the entire lane in this circumstance 
Reference 545.058(c) – bicycles are one of the vehicles permitted to operate on the improved shoulder 
without restriction.  They are not required to ride on the improved shoulder, but they are permitted to 
do so. 
(c) Bicycles on a roadway may ride two abreast as long as they ride in a single lane and do not impede 
traffic.  No more than two bicycles may ride abreast unless on part of the roadway exclusively for 
bicycles.  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 208 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 209 
Apply It: 
 
This bicyclist is riding just left of the center 
of this lane.  Is he committing a violation? 
YES                    NO 
 
 
 
 
 
This bicyclist is riding just left of the center 
of this lane.  Is he committing a violation? 
YES                    NO 
 
 
 
 
 
This bicyclist is riding just left of the center 
of this lane.  Is he committing a violation? 
YES                    NO 
 
 
 
These bicycles are riding two abreast.  The 
bicyclist on the right is as close as 
practicable to the right edge of the 
roadway.  A car must utilize the wrong side 
of the road to pass the bicycles in a passing 
zone.  Are the bicyclists committing a 
violation?  
                         YES                  NO 
 
 
 
 
551.104 – Safety Equipment 
(a)  All the time – bicycles are required to have a brake capable of making a braked wheel skid on dry, 
level, clean pavement.  
(b)  At nighttime – bicycles are required to have a brake as described above, plus: 
1) a lamp emitting white light visible 500 feet to the front 
2) a red reflector or a red lamp on the back 
If a red reflector is used on the rear of a bicycle at night, it must be visible at all distances between 50 to 
300 feet.  If a red lamp is used, it must be visible at a distance of 500 feet. 
Discussion:  What about bicycles with flashing lights?  It is not a violation for a bicycle to have a flashing 
white light on the front or a flashing red taillamp. 547.305 prohibits flashing red, white, or blue lamps on 
motor vehicles only.  Additionally, 547.002 exempts bicycles from the provisions of Chapter 547. 
551.107 – Operation of Electric Bicycle 
Electric bicycles are not required to comply with Subtitles A (Title and Registration), B (Driver’s License), 
and D (Insurance) and Chapter 663 (renumbered to Chapter 551A – Off-Highway Vehicle Operation). 
A person must be at least 15 years of age to operate a Class 3 electric bicycle. 
Reference 664.001 – Class 3 electric bicycle – an electric bicycle:  (A)  equipped with a motor that 
assists the rider only when the rider is pedaling; and  (B)  with a top assisted speed of more than 20 
but less than 28 miles per hour. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 210 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
THP Special Motorize Vehicle Handout 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 211 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES (SEGWAYS) 
551.201 – Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device 
Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device – a two non-tandem wheeled device designed 
for transporting one person that is self-balancing and propelled by an electric propulsion 
system with an average power of 750 watts or one horsepower. These are often called by 
the brand name Segway. 
551.202 – Operation on Roadway  
a)  If a sidewalk is available, an EPAMD must be operated on the sidewalk unless crossing a highway.  If 
a sidewalk is not available, an EPAMD may be operated on a residential street, roadway, or public 
highway with a speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less. 
b)  An EPAMD may be operated on a bicycle path. 
c)  If operated on the highway, must ride as close as practicable to the right-hand edge (like a bicycle). 
4)  An EPAMD should generally be treated like a bicycle and must follow the same rules as bicycles. 
551.203 – Sidewalks 
Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on sidewalks, and in fact they are required 
to be operated on sidewalks instead of roadways if sidewalks are available (see previous section). 
Word Association:  Electric Personal Assistive Mobility Device   on sidewalk if available   if highway, 
speed limit 30 MPH or less 
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES 
551.301 – Definition 
"Neighborhood Electric Vehicle" means a vehicle that can attain a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour 
on a paved level surface and otherwise complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 500 (49 
C.F.R. Section 571.500).  The referenced federal standard requires certain equipment for low speed 
vehicles that are manufactured to be operated on public highways. 
551.302 – Registration 
Neighborhood electric vehicles can be issued license plates and full registration by DMV just like any 
other automobile.  They will have a license plate with a corresponding windshield sticker. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 212 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Neighborhood Electric Vehicles can be legally operated on public roadways under one of two different 
types of operation (see 551.303 and 551.304 below).  The requirement to register and have insurance 
is dependent on the type of operation taking place. 
551.303 – Operation on Roadways 
Under this type of operation, the NEV is treated like a car.  A driver’s license, registration, and 
insurance are required. 
• May only be operated on highways with a speed limit of 45 MPH or less 
• May only be operated at speeds of 35 MPH or less 
Aside from roadway speed limitations, there are no other restrictions on this type of operation, 
although TXDOT, a county, or a municipality may prohibit the operation of a neighborhood electric 
vehicle on a street or highway if the governing body determines that the prohibition is necessary in the 
interest of safety. 
Reference 547.703 – a slow moving vehicle emblem is required if the neighborhood vehicle is operated 
at 25 MPH or less on a highway.  
Word Association:  NEV    if registered   only on highway with speed limit of 45 MPH or less 
551.304 – Limited Operation 
Under this type of operation, the NEV is treated like a golf cart.  Registration, a license plate, and 
insurance are not required.  A driver’s license is required if operated on a public highway. 
Under this section, the neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated in any of the following three circumstances: 
1) in a master planned community (see note below); 
2) on a public or private beach; or 
3) for transportation to or from a golf course when on a public highway for which the posted 
speed limit is not more than 35 miles per hour, if the neighborhood electric vehicle is operated 
during the daytime and not more than two miles from the location where the neighborhood 
electric vehicle is usually parked. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 213 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Note:  A neighborhood electric vehicle may be operated without registration or insurance in a master 
planned community.  “Master Planned Community” is not defined in the Transportation Code.  For 
additional information, see Texas Attorney General Opinion GA-0966 (excerpt below):  
Reference 601.052 – Insurance is not required when a NEV is operated under this section. 
Reference 547.703 – a slow moving vehicle emblem is required if a NEV is operated at 25 MPH or less on 
a highway. 
Word Association:  Neighborhood Electric Vehicle    if not registered   1) master planned 
community, 2) beach, or 3)  for golfing within 2 miles of course, daytime, and speed limit 35 MPH or less 
MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS 
551.351 – Definitions 
Motor-assisted scooter - a self-propelled device with: 
1) at least two wheels in contact with the ground  
2) a braking system 
3) a gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters 
4) a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit 
5) the ability to be propelled by human power alone 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 214 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
551.352 – Operation on Roadways or Sidewalks 
A motor-assisted scooter may only be operated on a street or highway with a speed limit of 35 MPH or 
less.  They may also be operated on sidewalks and bike paths.  Generally speaking, motor-assisted 
scooters are treated like bicycles. 
Word Association:  Motor-assisted scooter    only on highway with speed limit of 35 MPH or less   
treat like a bicycle 
POCKET BIKES/MINIMOTORBIKES 
551.351 – Definitions 
Pocket bike or minimotorbike – a self-propelled vehicle that: 
1) is equipped with an electric motor or combustion engine less than 50 cc 
2) has not more than two wheels in contact with the ground 
3) has a seat or saddle 
4) is not designed for use on a highway 
5) is ineligible for a certificate of title  
The term does not include a moped or motorcycle, an electric bicycle, a motorized mobility device, an 
electric personal assistive mobility device, or a neighborhood electric vehicle.  
551.353 – Application of Subchapter to Pocket Bike or Mini-motorbike 
A pocket bike or minimotorbike is not authorized to be operated any highway, road, street, bike path, or 
sidewalk.  Pocket bikes/minimotorbikes should only be operated off road/on private property. 
Word Association:  Pocket bike    not street legal, private property only 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 215 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
GOLF CARTS 
551.401 – Definitions 
Golf cart – a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for use on a golf course.  
551.402 – Registration Not Authorized; License Plates 
Texas DMV may not register a golf cart under normal registration – meaning they will not have a normal 
license plate and registration insignia combination. 
A golf cart operated on the highway in an approved manner, however, is required to display a golf cart 
license plate issued by DMV (unless being operated in a master planned community).  This is not 
registration – it is an identifying license plate.  A golf cart license plate does not expire.  
A golf cart license plate return should have a “GC” designation for vehicle type and will identify the plate 
as a golf cart plate: 
LIC G250J       
EWT  2000 GWT   2000 
GOLF CART PLT, STKR  REG CLASS 00    $ 0.00 COLORADO CNTY 
2009,EZGO,,GC,2649783,MISC,COLOR: UNK,COMM IMPED: N 
Golf Carts can be legally operated on public highways under one of two different types of operation 
(see 551.403 and 551.404 below).  Operation outside the parameters described in these two sections 
is prohibited. 
551.403 – Limited Operation 
Under this section, a golf cart may be operated in one of three circumstances:  
1) in a master planned community that is a residential subdivision or has in place a uniform set of 
restrictive covenants (see master planned community discussion in the 551.304 NEV section) 
2) on a public or private beach; or 
3) for transportation to or from a golf course when on a public highway for which the posted 
speed limit is not more than 35 miles per hour, if the golf cart is operated during the daytime 
and not more than five miles from the location where the golf cart is usually parked. 
Reference 601.052(a)(2-a) – Insurance is not required when a golf cart is operated under this section. 
Reference 547.703 – a slow moving vehicle emblem is required if a golf cart is operated at 25 MPH or 
less on a highway. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 216 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(b)  If the golf cart is being operated on a public roadway under (2) or (3), a golf cart license plate is 
required.  If the golf cart is being operated in a master planned community, a license plate is not 
required as long as the speed limit is not more than 35 MPH. 
Word Association:  Golf Cart   limited operation   1) master planned community, 2) beach, or 3)  for 
golfing within 5 miles of course, daytime, and speed limit 35 MPH or less 
551.404 – Operation in Municipalities and Certain Counties 
(a) Operation of Golf Carts in Municipalities 
In addition to the operation authorized by Section 551.403, the governing body of a municipality may 
allow operation of a golf cart on all or part of a highway that is in the corporate boundaries of the 
municipality and has a posted speed limit of not more than 35 miles per hour.   
This is accomplished by the city adopting an ordinance permitting this type of golf cart operation.  If a 
city has not adopted such an ordinance, operation of golf carts is generally prohibited (aside from the 
three circumstances discussed in the previous section). 
(b) Operation of Golf Carts in Certain Counties 
Certain counties are also authorized to allow an operator to operate a golf cart on all or part of a 
highway that is located in the unincorporated area of the county if the roadway has a speed limit of not 
more than 35 miles per hour.   
Not all counties have the authority to do so.  The county must: (1) border or contains a portion of the 
Red River; or (2) border the Gulf of Mexico and has a population of less than 500,000. 
A golf cart operated under this section would be required to have a golf cart license plate (551.402), 
insurance (601.051), and a licensed driver (521.021).  The golf cart must also be equipped according to 
551.4041 (see below). 
Reference 547.703 – a slow moving vehicle emblem is required if a golf cart is operated at 25 MPH or 
less on a highway. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 217 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Word Association:  Golf Cart   city/county ordinance   only on highway with speed limit of 35 MPH 
or less   Golf Cart license plate required 
551.4041 – Equipment 
A golf cart operated under Section 551.404 (in a municipality or county when allowed by ordinance) 
must have the following equipment:  
1) headlamps 
2) taillamps 
3) reflectors 
4) parking brake 
5) mirrors 
551.405 – Crossing Intersections 
Golf carts are generally only permitted on highways with a speed limit of 35 MPH or less, however they 
may cross larger highways at intersections. 
Apply It: 
You encounter this golf cart on the roadway in the city of Bastrop.  
Bastrop has passed a city ordinance permitting the operation of golf 
carts within city limits. 
The roadway has a speed limit of 40 MPH.  The golf cart is displaying 
a golf cart license plate.  The driver has a license and the golf cart is 
insured. 
Is the operator of this golf cart committing a violation?      
YES                   
  NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 218 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
You stop this golf cart for operating on the highway.  The roadway has a 
speed limit of 35 MPH.  The driver explains that he is on his way to play golf 
at the local golf course.   
You determine the driver lives 4 miles away from the golf course.  The golf 
cart is not displaying a golf cart license plate. 
Is the driver committing a violation?                           
 YES             
   NO 
You encounter this golf cart in a master planned community with 
publicly maintained roadways (i.e. highways). 
The driver has a driver’s license. 
The golf cart is not displaying a golf cart license plate. 
The golf cart is not insured. 
Is the driver committing a violation?                    
  YES          
SECTION 6.4 – CHAPTER 551A – OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES 
  NO 
BPOC Objective 22.18 – Recognize the regulations relating to operation in municipalities and certain 
counties. 
551A.001 – Definitions 
(1-d) There are four vehicles to which the term “Off-Highway Vehicle” applies: 
A. All-terrain vehicle 
B. Sand rail 
C. Recreational off-highway vehicle 
D. Utility Vehicle 
Each of these vehicles is treated the same in the TRC.  They may all be operated in the same areas and 
in the same manner.  They all fall under the umbrella term “Off-Highway Vehicle”. 
(1)  All-Terrain Vehicle – three or more tires and designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use.  Not 
designed for farming or lawn care.  Not more than 50 inches wide. 
(3)  Sand Rail – designed for off-highway use in sandy terrain, has a tubular frame, integrated roll cage, 
and a rear or mid-mounted engine.  Weighs between 700 and 2,000 pounds. 
(5)  Recreational Off-Highway Vehicle – four or more tires and designed by the manufacturer for off
highway use.  Not designed for farming or lawn care. 
(6)  Utility Vehicle – not a golf cart or a lawn mower, at least four tires, designed by the manufacturer 
for off-highway utility work and not for recreational purposes. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 219 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
THP Off-Highway Vehicle Handout 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 220 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
OFF-HIGHWAY OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES 
551A.031 – Safety Certificate Required 
(a)  Off-highway vehicles may not be operated on land owned or leased by the government not open to 
vehicular traffic unless the land is public off-highway vehicle land and the operation is in compliance 
with the Parks and Wildlife Code. 
Reference 551A.001(4) – "Public off-highway vehicle land" means land on which off-highway 
recreation is authorized under Chapter 29, Parks and Wildlife Code. 
(b) and (c)  A person operating an off-highway vehicle must hold and carry an off-highway vehicle safety 
certificate if operating on public off-highway vehicle land or a beach.  If the person does not hold a 
safety certificate, they must be under the direct supervision of an adult who holds a safety certificate. 
Note:  This certificate is not required if operating an off-highway vehicle on the highway in a manner 
authorized by Chapter 551A.  
551A.032 – Operation by Person Younger than 14 years of age 
A person younger than 14 years of age who is operating an off-highway vehicle on public off-highway 
vehicle land must be accompanied by and be under the direct supervision of the person's parent or 
guardian or an adult who is authorized by the person's parent or guardian. 
551A.033 – Operation on Beach   
A person operating an off-highway vehicle on a beach must hold and have in the person's possession a 
driver's license.  An operator of an off-highway vehicle may drive the vehicle on a beach that is open to 
motor vehicle traffic. 
Off-Highway Vehicle equipment, safety apparel, and other considerations are addressed across 
numerous sections.  A summary of these requirements for beach operation is below: 
For Beach Operation: 
• Operator must possess a driver’s license 
• A slow moving vehicle emblem is required if operated at 25 MPH or less (547.703) 
• Insurance is not required (601.052(a)(2-b)) 
• Additional equipment and safety apparel will be discussed later in this chapter 
551A.034 – Crossing Highway at Point Other Than Intersection 
Off-highway vehicles should never cross an Interstate or a controlled access highway. 
Off-highway vehicles can cross a divided highway only at an intersection. 
Off-highway vehicles can cross other highways not described above at a point other than an 
intersection, but they must bring the vehicle to a complete stop before crossing, yield the right-of-way 
to oncoming traffic, and make the crossing at a 90 degree angle where there are no obstructions with 
headlights and taillights activated. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 221 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE OPERATION ON THE HIGHWAY 
551A.051 – Operation on the Highway 
A person may only operate an off-highway vehicle on a highway (i.e. public road) in a manner specifically 
authorized by Chapter 551A. 
This does not apply to the operation of an off-highway vehicle that is owned and registered as 
authorized by Section 502.140(c) by the state, a county, or a municipality.  
The following sections detail the only circumstances a person may operate an off-highway vehicle on 
the highway: 
• 551A.033 – on a public beach 
• 551A.053(a) – In a municipality if approved by city ordinance 
• 551A.053(b) – In unincorporated areas of a county if approved by county ordinance 
• 551A.055(1) – in a master planned community 
• 551A.055(2)  – for golfing when within 2 miles of a golf course 
• 551A.057 – For agricultural purposes or utility work 
• 551A.058 – for law enforcement/fire/EMS purposes 
If you encounter an off-highway vehicle and it is not in one of the circumstances described above, the 
operation is illegal – Operate OHV When Prohibited. 
551A.052 – Registration; License Plates 
(a)  Off-Highway Vehicles may not be registered by an individual like normal vehicles under Chapter 502.  
They can, however, receive an off-highway vehicle license plate.   
(b)  This license plate is required to be displayed on the vehicle any time 
the vehicle is operated on public highways (except for when used for 
agricultural purposes or utility work under 551A.057).  The plate is non
expiring and the cost is $10. 
551A.053 – Operation on Public Roadway Authorized by Municipalities or Counties 
The governing body of a municipality or certain counties may allow operation of an off-highway vehicle 
on all or part of a highway that is in the corporate boundaries of the municipality and has a posted 
speed limit of not more than 35 miles per hour. 
For Operation in a Municipality or County: 
• The city or county must specifically authorize the operation by ordinance 
• The roadway must have a speed limit of 35 MPH or less 
• Driver license and insurance are required 
• Off-Highway Vehicle license plate is required (551A.052) 
(c)  Only certain counties may permit off-highway vehicle operation under this section – the county must 
border or contain a portion of the Red River, border or contain a portion of the Guadalupe River and 
part of a barrier island that borders the Gulf of Mexico, or be adjacent to one of these counties with a 
population of less than 37,000 and  part of a barrier island or peninsula that borders the Gulf of Mexico. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 222 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Word Association:  OHV   city/county ordinance   only on highway with speed limit of 35 MPH or 
less   OHV  license plate required 
551A.054 – Prohibition of Operation 
Counties, Municipalities, and TXDOT all have the authority to prohibit off-highway vehicle operation in 
areas that are deemed unsafe. 
551A.055 – Operation Authorized in Certain Areas 
Off-Highway vehicles may be operated as if they were golf carts in the following two circumstances:  
1) in a master planned community (see master planned community discussion in the 551.304 NEV 
section) 
2) for transportation to or from a golf course when on a public highway for which the posted 
speed limit is not more than 35 miles per hour, if the off-highway vehicle is operated during the 
daytime and not more than two miles from the location where the off-highway vehicle is 
usually parked. 
For Off-Highway Vehicle Operation under this section (like a golf cart): 
• Insurance is not required to operate an OHV under this section (601.052(a)(2-b)) 
• Off-Highway Vehicle license plate is required (551A.052) 
• A slow moving vehicle emblem is required if operated at 25 MPH or less (547.703) 
Word Association:  OHV   limited operation   1) master planned community, 2)  for golfing within 2 
miles of course, daytime, and speed limit 35 MPH or less 
551A.056 – Crossing Intersections 
An unregistered off-highway vehicle may cross a highway at an intersection, including an intersection 
with a highway that has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour. 
551A.057 – Agricultural or Utility Operation on Highway 
The operator of an unregistered off-highway vehicle may operate the vehicle on a highway that is not an 
interstate or limited-access highway if the transportation is in connection with agricultural products or 
utility work performed by a utility. 
For Off-Highway Vehicle Operation under this section (Farming or Utility Work): 
• Operation is not permitted on interstate or limited-access highway 
• A triangular orange flag must be displayed at least 6 feet above the ground at the back of the 
vehicle 
• The vehicle’s headlights and taillights must be illuminated 
• The operation must take place during the daytime 
• The distance may not exceed 25 miles from point of origin to destination 
• An Off-Highway Vehicle license plate is not required 
• Helmet, eye protection, safety certification, and seatbelts are not required 
• Driver license and insurance are required 
• A slow moving vehicle emblem is required if operated at 25 MPH or less (547.703) 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 223 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
551A.058 – Law Enforcement Operation 
A peace officer or other person who provides law enforcement, firefighting, ambulance, medical, or 
other emergency services may operate an unregistered off-highway vehicle on a highway if the 
transportation is in connection with the performance of the operator's official duty. 
For Off-Highway Vehicle Operation under this section (Law Enforcement): 
• Operation is not permitted on interstate or limited-access highway 
• A triangular orange flag must be displayed at least 6 feet above the ground  
• The vehicle’s headlights and taillights must be illuminated 
• The distances may not exceed 10 miles from point of origin to destination 
• An Off-Highway Vehicle license plate is not required 
• Driver license is required 
551A.071 – Required Equipment; Display of Lights 
(a)  An off-highway vehicle that is operated on public off-highway vehicle land, a beach, or a highway 
must be equipped with: 
1) a brake system 
2) a muffler system 
3) a spark arrester 
(b)  An off-highway vehicle that is operated on public off-highway vehicle land, a beach, or a highway 
must display a lighted headlight and taillight during the period from one-half hour after sunset to one
half hour before sunrise (nighttime as defined in 541.401) and at any time when visibility is reduced 
because of insufficient light or atmospheric conditions. 
(c)  It is a violation to operate an off-highway vehicle on public off-highway vehicle land, a beach, or a 
highway if the vehicle has an exhaust system that has been modified with a cutout, bypass, or similar 
device or the spark arrester has been removed or modified. 
551A.072 – Safety Apparel Required 
(a)  A person operating or riding on an off-highway vehicle on public off-highway vehicle land, a beach, 
or a highway must: 
• wear a DOT approved safety helmet 
• wear eye protection 
• use seat belts if the vehicle is equipped with seat belts 
(b)  The helmet and eye protection requirements above do not apply to a motor vehicle that has four 
wheels, is equipped with bench or bucket seats and seat belts, and includes a roll bar or roll cage. 
Other exclusions:  The operator of an off-highway vehicle used for agricultural or utility work under 
551A.057 is not required to utilize the safety equipment described in this section. 
551A.073 – Reckless or Careless Operation Prohibited 
A person may not operate an off-highway vehicle on public off-highway vehicle land or a beach in a 
careless or reckless manner that endangers, injures, or damages any person or property.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 224 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
This section is specific to operation on public off-highway vehicle land (551A.001) or a beach.  What 
about reckless off-highway vehicle operation on the highway?  The operator can be charged with 
“Reckless Driving” just like any other vehicle (545.401). 
Note:  Just like the offense of reckless driving, an officer should be able to articulate what was careless 
or reckless about the off-highway vehicle operation when filing this charge. 
551A.074 – Carrying Passengers 
A person may not carry a passenger on an off-highway vehicle operated on public off-highway vehicle 
land, a beach, or a highway unless the vehicle is designed by the manufacturer to transport a passenger. 
551A.091 – Violation of Chapter 
An offense for a violation of this chapter committed on public off-highway vehicle land or a beach is a 
Class C misdemeanor. 
Note:  What about an offense committed on a highway?  It is also a class C misdemeanor (542.401 – 
General Penalty for a Violation of Subtitle C) 
Apply It: 
You encounter this ATV operating in a master planned 
community that has publicly maintained roads. 
Is ATV operation permitted in this location?    YES       
NO 
Is the driver committing a violation by not having an OHV license 
plate?                   
 YES                       
NO 
Are the vehicle occupants committing a violation for not wearing 
helmets and eye protection?           
YES                    
  NO 
You encounter this ATV operating in a master planned 
community that has privately maintained roads. 
Is ATV operation permitted in this location?    YES       
NO 
Is the driver committing a violation by not having an OHV license 
plate?                   
 YES                    
   NO 
Are the vehicle occupants committing a violation for not wearing 
helmets and eye protection?           
YES                    
  NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 225 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 226 
 
You encounter this utility vehicle operating on the highway.  The 
driver explains that she is a farmer and she uses the utility 
vehicle to haul produce to the Farmer’s Market.  You ask where 
she is going and she says she is going down to the coffee shop 
for breakfast. 
Is the driver committing a violation for operating an OHV When 
Prohibited?                                YES                     NO 
If the driver were actually on her way to the Farmer’s Market, 
does she have all the required equipment?       YES        NO 
 
You encounter this recreational off-highway vehicle on the 
highway. 
The driver explains he has modified his vehicle with street tires and 
additional lighting equipment to make it street legal.  The driver 
lives in Texas but the vehicle is registered in North Dakota as a 
motorcycle. 
Is the driver committing a violation for operating an off-highway 
vehicle when prohibited?                       YES                       NO 
 
 
Resource: The THP OHV Guidance for Law Enforcement document is available in the Resources area of 
the TRC Training Program Website: https://txdpstrafficlaw.com/resources/ 
 
MODULE 6 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
 
Chapter 548 
 
1.  Place a check mark next to each vehicle that requires an annual safety inspection: 
_____   A vehicle bearing a 30-day permit 
_____   A vehicle bearing a 144-hour permit 
_____   A farm trailer registered for 10,000 pounds 
_____   A trailer registered for 10,000 pounds 
_____   A trailer registered for 7,500 pounds 
_____   A trailer registered for 7,501 pounds 
_____   A vehicle bearing an antique vehicle license plate 
_____   A water well workover rig bearing a machinery license plate 
_____   A vehicle bearing a Dealer Temporary Tag 
Chapter 550 
2. A driver is required to immediately stop at the scene of a collision any time they are involved in 
a crash with another vehicle that is attended by a person, even if the other person is not injured. 
a. True 
b. False 
3. An operator who strikes an unattended vehicle and flees the scene commits a Class C 
Misdemeanor if the damage is ____________________________.  
4. An operator who strikes a highway fixture and flees the scene commits a Class B Misdemeanor if 
the damage is ____________________________.  
5. A peace officer who investigates a crash must report the crash to TXDOT not later than: 
a. 10th business day after the crash 
b. 5th business day after the crash 
c. 10th day after the crash 
d. 5th day after the crash for injury crashes, 10th day after the crash for non-injury crashes 
6. A peace officer who investigates a crash is only required to report the crash to TXDOT if it 
involves injuries or death, or if a vehicle involved in the crash cannot be normally or safely 
driven. 
a. True 
b. False 
Chapter 551 
7. A person riding a bicycle must abide by all traffic laws except those laws that by their nature 
cannot apply to a bicycle. 
a. True 
b. False 
8. If a sidewalk is available, an electric personal assistive mobility device may not be operated in 
the roadway. 
a. True 
b. False 
9. An electric personal assistive mobility device may only be operated on a roadway with a speed 
limit of __________ or less. 
10. A motor-assisted scooter may only be operated on a roadway with a speed limit of __________ 
or less. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 227 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
11. If a Neighborhood Electric Vehicle is not registered, list three places or circumstances where it 
could still be operated legally: 
1.  ______________________________________________ 
2.  ______________________________________________ 
3.  ____________________________________________________________________________ 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
12. If a Neighborhood Electric Vehicle is registered, it may only be operated at speeds up to 
______________ and only on roadways with a speed limit of ______________ or less. 
Chapter 551A 
13. Off-Highway vehicles are designed for off-highway use, therefore they are never permitted to 
operate on public highways. 
a. True 
b. False 
14. List the four vehicles that are considered “off-highway vehicles”. 
1.  _______________________________________________ 
2.  _______________________________________________ 
3.  _______________________________________________ 
4.  _______________________________________________ 
15. An All-Terrain Vehicle is not more than _____________ inches wide.  A similar vehicle wider 
than 50 inches would be considered a ___________________________________________. 
16. A person must be at least _______________ years of age to operate an off-highway vehicle on 
public off-highway vehicle land without parental supervision. 
17. Off-highway vehicles operated on public off-highway vehicle land or highways must be equipped 
with: 
a. A brake system 
b. A muffler system 
c. A spark arrester 
d. All of the Above 
e. A and B Only 
18. It is illegal to operate an off-highway vehicle on the highway unless in the specific circumstances 
described in TRC chapter 551A. 
a. True 
b. False 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 228 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
19. An off-highway vehicle bearing an off-highway vehicle license plate may operate without 
restriction because the vehicle is considered registered. 
a. True 
b. False 
20. Describe the milage limitations for each of the off-highway vehicle uses below: 
Agricultural or Utility Work -   ____________________  miles 
Law Enforcement - ___________________ miles 
21. Neighborhood Electric Vehicles, Golf Carts, and Off-Highway vehicles can all be operated 
unregistered as transportation to/from a golf course.  Operation must take place during the 
_________________ and on highway with a speed limit of ______________ or less. 
22. When operated unregistered to get to/from a golf course, list the mileage restriction for each 
vehicle listed below: 
Neighborhood Electric Vehicle – not more than  _______________ from the golf course. 
Golf Cart – not more than _________________ from the golf course. 
Off-Highway Vehicle – not more than __________________ from the golf course. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 229 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
MODULE 7 – TRC CHAPTER 552 – HSC CHAPTER 365 
SECTION 7.1 – CHAPTER 552 – PEDESTRIANS 
BPOC Objective 22.19 – Recognize the regulations relating to pedestrians. 
552.001 – Traffic-Control Signals 
(a)  If a specific pedestrian signal is not present, 
pedestrians walking along roadways must comply 
with the red and green traffic signals for other traffic 
on that roadway.   
(b)  A pedestrian facing a steady green signal may 
proceed across a roadway in a crosswalk.  
(c)  A pedestrian facing a steady red or yellow signal 
may not enter a roadway.  
This pedestrian may not cross because the 
traffic signal is red. 
552.002 – Pedestrian Right-of-Way if Control Signal Present 
A pedestrian must comply with a pedestrian crossing signal if present.  If a 
pedestrian signal indicates “Walk” the pedestrian may proceed across the roadway 
and vehicles must yield the right of way to the pedestrian.   
A pedestrian may not begin crossing when the “Don’t Walk” (solid red hand) or the 
“Wait” (flashing red hand) signals are present.  If the pedestrian has already 
partially crossed when the wait signal is displayed, they should proceed to a 
sidewalk or safety island. 
552.003 – Right-of-Way at Crosswalk 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing a roadway in a 
crosswalk if no traffic control signal is in place. 
(b)  A pedestrian may not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and proceed into a crosswalk in 
the path of a vehicle so close that it is impossible for the vehicle operator to stop and yield. 
Note:  This applies to any crosswalk, not just crosswalks at intersections. 
(c)  The operator of a vehicle approaching from the rear of a vehicle that is stopped at a crosswalk to 
permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway may not pass the stopped vehicle. 
(d)  If this offense causes serious bodily injury or death to a visually impaired or disabled person, the 
maximum fine is $500 and 30 hours of community service may be required to an organization that 
serves visually impaired or disabled persons. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 230 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
552.004 – Pedestrian to Keep Right 
Pedestrians crossing in a crosswalk shall proceed in the right half of the crosswalk if possible.  This 
simply facilitates the flow of pedestrian traffic in the crosswalk as pedestrians cross from opposite sides 
of the street. 
552.005 – Crossing at Point Other Than Crosswalk 
(a)  If a pedestrian is attempting to cross a roadway at a place other than a marked crosswalk or 
unmarked crosswalk the pedestrian is required to yield the right of way to a vehicle on the highway.  
This offense is commonly used in crash investigation when a pedestrian is struck while attempting to 
cross the road outside a crosswalk. 
(b)  If a pedestrian is crossing a roadway between adjacent intersections that both have traffic control 
signals, a pedestrian may only cross in a crosswalk (failure to do so is commonly called “jaywalking”).   
552.006 – Use of Sidewalk 
(a)  If a sidewalk is available, a pedestrian is required to walk on the sidewalk rather than in the 
roadway.  
(b)  If a sidewalk is not available, pedestrians may walk along or in the roadway but must walk on the left 
side of the roadway or shoulder facing traffic unless that area is obstructed or unsafe. 
(c) The operator of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, or private road or driveway 
shall yield the ROW to a pedestrian approaching on a sidewalk extending across the alley, building 
entrance or exit, road, or driveway. 
Apply It: 
Is this pedestrian committing a violation? 
YES                         
NO 
Is this pedestrian committing a violation? 
YES                         
NO 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 231 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Is this pedestrian committing a violation? 
YES                         
NO 
552.007 – Solicitation by Pedestrians 
A person may not stand in a roadway to solicit a ride, contribution, employment, or business from an 
occupant of a vehicle, except that a person may stand in a roadway to solicit a charitable contribution if 
authorized to do so by the local authority having jurisdiction over the roadway. 
Note:  This section does not apply to a panhandler on the sidewalk or shoulder.  A person only commits 
an offense if soliciting a charitable contribution while standing in the roadway (defined in 541.302). 
IMPORTANT: Although this section remains in the law books, several civil courts have held that it is 
unconstitutional on the grounds of a 1st Amendment violation. Guidance from the Texas DPS Office of 
General Counsel was e-mailed to THP Transportation Code instructors on 7/14/2023 after dialogue 
about the constitutional challenges to this law. DPS personnel are discouraged from taking enforcement 
action under 552.007, per OGC guidance. Other agencies should be guided by their own legal counsel. 
552.008 – Drivers to Exercise Due Care 
The operator of a vehicle is required to exercise due care to avoid colliding with a pedestrian on a 
roadway, even if the vehicle has ROW.   
Vehicles shall give warning by sounding the horn and shall exercise proper precaution on observing a 
child or an obviously confused or incapacitated person on a roadway.   
552.010 – Blind Pedestrians 
(a)  No person may carry a white cane on a public street or highway unless totally or partially blind.   
White cane is defined in (d)(2) and has the meaning assigned by 121.002, Human Resources Code – a 
cane or walking stick that is metallic or white in color, or white tipped with a contrasting color, and 
that is carried by a blind person to assist the blind person in traveling from place to place. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection or crosswalk where a pedestrian guided by an 
assistance animal or carrying a white cane is crossing or attempting to cross shall take necessary 
precautions to avoid injuring or endangering the pedestrian. 
(c)  If this offense causes serious bodily injury or death to a blind person, the maximum fine is $500 and 
30 hours of community service may be required to an organization that serves visually impaired or 
disabled persons. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 232 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.2 – CHAPTER 552A – DEVICES SUBJECT TO PEDESTRIAN LAWS 
BPOC Objective 22.19 – Recognize the regulations relating to pedestrians. 
552A.0101 – Operators of Certain Mobility Devices 
An operator of a wheelchair or motorized mobility device is considered to be a 
pedestrian.    
Motorized mobility device means a device designed for transportation of persons 
with physical disabilities that: 
1) has three or more wheels; 
2) is propelled by a battery-powered motor;  
3) has not more than one forward gear; and 
4) is not capable of speeds exceeding eight miles per hour. 
Apply It: 
A person in an electric wheelchair is traveling on 
the right side of the roadway on this two-way road.   
There is not a sidewalk available. 
Is the wheelchair operator committing a violation? 
YES                         
SECTION 7.3 – CHAPTER 600 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
  NO 
BPOC Objective 22.28 – Review regulations related to the removal of injurious materials and wrecker 
or damaged vehicles from the highway. 
600.001 – Removing Material from Highway 
(a)  A person who drops or throws destructive or injurious material on the highway is required to 
immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed. 
(b)  A person who removes a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway is required to remove glass 
or another injurious substance dropped on the highway from the vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 233 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.4 – CHAPTER 601 – MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY RESPONSIBILITY 
BPOC Objective 22.26 – Describe the regulations regarding liability insurance for motor vehicles and 
financial responsibility. 
601.051 – Requirement of Financial Responsibility 
A person may not operate a motor vehicle in this state unless they have established financial 
responsibility for the vehicle.  This is typically done with an insurance policy, however there are five 
acceptable forms of financial responsibility (detailed below). 
601.002(3) – "Financial responsibility" means the ability to respond in damages for liability for a 
collision … that arises out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle. 
The five acceptable forms of financial responsibility are: 
1) a motor vehicle liability insurance policy; 
2) a surety bond filed under Section 601.121; 
3) a deposit under Section 601.122 (a $55,000 cash deposit with the state comptroller); 
4) a deposit under Section 601.123 (a $55,000 cash deposit with the county judge); 
5) self-insurance under Section 601.124. 
Each form of financial responsibility will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter. 
Case Law – Sanchez v. State (Texas Court of Appeals) 137 S.W.3d 860 (2004) – Sanchez was convicted for 
failure to maintain financial responsibility, however his conviction was overturned because the officer 
only asked him for proof of insurance.  When Sanchez did not have proof of insurance, the officer did 
not ask about any of the other methods of proving financial responsibility.  The court held that the 
officer did not have probable cause to file the charge after only asking about one of the five methods of 
maintaining financial responsibility.   
Moral of the story: If you ask someone for their insurance card and they are uninsured, ask them if 
they have any other form of financial responsibility prior to filing a charge for Failure to Maintain 
Financial Responsibility. This ensures you have established probable cause of a violation. 
601.052 – Exceptions to Financial Responsibility Requirement 
This section describes vehicles that are not required to maintain financial responsibility: 
1)  a former military vehicle or vehicle that is at least 25 years old and that is used only for 
exhibitions, club activities, parades, and other functions of public interest and not for regular 
transportation (antique vehicle license plates). 
2)  a neighborhood electric vehicle that is operated only as authorized by Section 551.304 (in a 
master planned community, on a beach, or when used as a golf cart while golfing within 2 miles 
of the golf course).  
2-a) a golf cart that is operated only as authorized by Section 551.403 (in a master planned 
community, on a beach, or while golfing within 5 miles of the golf course).  
BPOC Student Manual - Page 234 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
2-b) an off-highway vehicle that is operated only as authorized by Subchapter C, Chapter 551A (on 
public off-highway vehicle land or a beach), or Section 551A.055 (in a master planned community 
or when used as a golf cart while golfing within 2 miles of the golf course).   
3)  a motor vehicle operated for a volunteer fire department the title of which is held in the name of a 
volunteer fire department. 
601.053 – Evidence of Financial Responsibility 
When an operator is required to demonstrate compliance with the requirement to maintain financial 
responsibility to a peace officer, proof can be in any of the forms described in this section: 
If their financial responsibility is insurance: 
1)  a motor vehicle liability insurance policy 
2)  a standard proof of motor vehicle liability insurance form/card 
2-a) an image displayed on a wireless communication device that includes the required information 
3)  an insurance binder that confirms the operator is in compliance 
If their financial responsibility is a surety bond under 601.121: 
4)  a surety bond certificate  
If their financial responsibility is a deposit with the state comptroller under 601.122: 
5)  a certificate of a deposit with the comptroller covering the vehicle 
If their financial responsibility is a deposit with the county judge under 601.123: 
6)  a certificate of a deposit with the appropriate county judge covering the vehicle 
If their financial responsibility is self-insurance as described in 601.124: 
7)  a certificate of self-insurance covering the vehicle 
(c)  Prior to issuing a citation for failure to maintain financial responsibility, a peace officer must attempt 
to verify financial responsibility through the Financial Responsibility Verification Program.  For DPS 
officers, this occurs automatically when you run a vehicle’s license plate number.   
DPS Policy – “Unconfirmed” status in the insurance database shall not be used as probable cause for 
a traffic stop (Chapter 5, THP Manual).  Discussion:  Although some case law indicates a stop can be 
made for “unconfirmed” status, the Department recognizes that there are some instances where a 
vehicle is properly insured but shows “unconfirmed” (commercial policies, recently written policies, 
etc.) and therefore prohibits traffic stops on this basis by policy. 
(d)  If a person displays financial responsibility information to a peace officer on a cell phone, the peace 
officer does not have effective consent to access the contents of the phone aside from viewing the 
financial responsibility information.  
601.054 – Owner May Provide Evidence of Financial Responsibility for Others 
The owner of a vehicle may establish acceptable financial responsibility for their employees or members 
of the owner’s immediate family. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 235 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
601.071 – Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance; Requirements 
If an owner maintains financial responsibility by purchasing a liability insurance policy, the policy must 
be an owner’s or operator’s policy that is issued by an authorized agency and that meets all the 
minimum coverage requirements. 
601.073 – Required Policy Terms 
(a)  Certain information is required to be part of a motor vehicle liability insurance policy.  This ensures 
that the policy is compliant with TRC requirements.  The policy must contain: 
1) the name and address of the named insured; 
2) the coverage provided under the policy; 
3) the premium charged for the policy; 
4) the policy period; and 
5) the limits of liability. 
(c)  An insurance policy may not be cancelled after the occurrence of injury, death, or damage.  If the 
policy was in place at the time of a crash, the policy must cover the liabilities incurred. 
601.081 – Standard Proof of Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance Form 
This section describes a standard proof of insurance form.  This is what most motorists carry in their 
vehicle as evidence of their insurance policy. 
601.121 – Surety Bond  (2nd Method of Maintaining Financial Resp.)  
Financial responsibility may be maintained by filing a bond with Texas DPS that essentially covers 
liabilities to the same degree that a motor vehicle insurance policy would cover liabilities.   
A certificate will be issued with this bond that may be displayed by the vehicle operator to comply with a 
peace officer’s request for proof of financial responsibility. 
601.122 – Deposit of Cash or Securities with Comptroller  (3rd Method of Maintaining Financial Resp.) 
Financial responsibility may be maintained by making a deposit in the amount of $55,000 with the state 
comptroller.  This money will be accessible to pay liabilities that a person may incur as a result of a 
crash. 
A certificate of deposit will be issued that may be displayed by the vehicle operator to comply with a 
peace officer’s request for proof of financial responsibility. 
601.123 – Deposit of Cash or Cashier's Check with County Judge  (4th Method of Maintaining Financial 
Resp.) 
Financial responsibility may be maintained by making a deposit in the amount of $55,000 with the 
county judge.  This money will be accessible to pay liabilities that a person may incur as a result of a 
crash.   
A certificate of deposit will be issued that may be displayed by the vehicle operator to comply with a 
peace officer’s request for proof of financial responsibility. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 236 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
601.124 – Self-Insurance  (5th Method of Maintaining Financial Resp.) 
A person in whose name more than 25 motor vehicles are registered may qualify as a self-insurer by 
obtaining a certificate of self-insurance.  The department (DPS) may issue a certificate of self-insurance 
to a person if the person applies for the certificate and the department is satisfied that the person has 
and will continue to have the ability to pay judgments obtained against the person. 
This is most commonly done when a company owns a fleet of many vehicles and also has significant 
resources to cover liabilities. 
A certificate of self-insurance will be issued that may be displayed by the vehicle operator to comply 
with a peace officer’s request for proof of financial responsibility. 
601.191 – Operate Without Proof of Financial Responsibility 
(a)  It is a violation to operate a motor vehicle in Texas without maintaining one of the accepted forms of 
financial responsibility.   
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $175 or more 
than $350.   
(c)  If a person has been previously convicted of an offense under this section, an offense under this 
section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $350 or more than $1,000.  If a person is 
indigent, the court may lower the fine, but only for a first time offender. 
(e)  A citation issued for an offense under this section must include an indication that the peace officer 
was unable at the time of the alleged offense to verify financial responsibility for the vehicle through the 
verification program database. 
601.193 – Defense; Responsibility in Effect at Time of Alleged Offense 
It is a defense to prosecution for failure to maintain financial responsibility if the person is able to 
produce proof of financial responsibility that was in place at the time of the alleged offense. 
After the court verifies a document produced under Subsection (a), the court shall dismiss the charge. 
In other words, the person was covered by financial responsibility at the time of the offense, they were 
just not able to show the officer proof of this coverage. 
601.194 – Defense; Possession of Vehicle for Repair 
It is a defense to prosecution for failure to maintain financial responsibility if the motor vehicle operated 
by the person charged was in the possession of that person for the sole purpose of maintenance or 
repair and was not owned in whole or in part by that person. 
In other words, a mechanic driving a vehicle that he does not own as part of the diagnosis or repair 
process has a defense to prosecution if they are charged with failing to maintain financial responsibility 
for the vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 237 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.5 – CHAPTER 621 – GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT 
621.001 – Definitions 
(1) Commercial motor vehicle – a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the 
transportation of property or delivery purposes. 
(3) Department – Texas Department of Motor Vehicles 
(6) Semitrailer – a vehicle without motive power that is designed, or used with a motor vehicle, so that 
some of its weight and the weight of its load rests on or is carried by the motor vehicle. 
(7) Trailer – a vehicle without motive power that is designed or used to carry property or passengers on 
its own structure exclusively and drawn by a motor vehicle. 
(9) Vehicle – a mechanical device in, on, or by which a person or property can be transported on a public 
highway.  The term includes a motor vehicle, commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, or 
semitrailer but does not include manufactured housing. 
621.002 – Vehicle Registration Receipt for Certain Heavy Vehicles 
A copy of the registration receipt for a commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, or semitrailer 
shall be carried on the vehicle when the vehicle is on a public highway and presented to an officer 
authorized to enforce this chapter on request of the officer.   
Remember: this chapter has a new definition of commercial motor vehicle that is not based on 
weight – a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the transportation of 
property or delivery purposes. 
621.501 – Failure to Carry or Present Vehicle License Receipt 
A person commits an offense if the person fails to carry or present a vehicle registration receipt as 
required by 621.002.  This registration receipt is required to be carried in commercial motor vehicles. 
621.006 – Restricted Operation on Certain Holidays 
DMV may impose restrictions on the weight and size of vehicles to be operated on state highways on 
the following holidays only: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Memorial Day; 
(3)  Independence Day; 
(4)  Labor Day; 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day; and 
(6)  Christmas Day. 
Generally, oversized loads that required DMV permits should not be seen operating on these days. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 238 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
621.101 – Maximum Weight of Vehicle or Combination 
(a)  A vehicle or combination of vehicles may not be operated over or on a public highway if the vehicle 
or combination has:  
(1)  a single axle weight heavier than 20,000 pounds 
(2)  a tandem axle weight heavier than 34,000 pounds 
(3)  an overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles heavier than the weight 
computed using the following formula and rounding the result to the nearest 500 pounds:  W = 
500((LN/(N - 1)) + 12N + 36)   (this formula is explained further in the text of the law). 
It is a violation to operate with tires that carry a weight heavier than the weight specified and marked 
on the sidewall of the tire unless the vehicle is being operated under a special permit. 
(b) The overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles may not be heavier than 
80,000 pounds. 
621.201 – Maximum Width 
(a)  The total width of a vehicle other than a passenger vehicle, including a load on the vehicle but 
excluding any safety device, may not be greater than 102 inches.  Side view mirrors would be considered 
a “safety device” and do not count towards overall width. 
(b)  The total width of a passenger vehicle and its load may not be greater than eight feet (96 inches). 
Note:  “Passenger vehicle” is not specifically defined.   
(c)  Passenger vehicles may not carry a load extending more than three inches beyond the left side line 
of its fenders or more than six inches beyond the right side line of its fenders.  
Width Summary 
Passenger Vehicle 
• May not be wider than 96 inches including any load 
• May carry a load that extends 3 inches to the left or 6 inches to the right as long as overall width 
does not exceed 96 inches 
Everything Else 
• May not be wider than 102 inches including any load but excluding safety devices 
• No limitations on load extension left or right as long as overall width does not exceed 102 inches 
621.203 – Maximum Length of Motor Vehicle 
A motor vehicle, other than a truck-tractor, may not be longer than 45 feet. 
Note: There is no length limitation for a truck-tractor.  When a truck tractor is combined with a trailer, 
only the trailer has a specific maximum length (discussed in the next section). 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 239 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
621.204 – Maximum Length of Semitrailer or Trailer 
(a)  A semitrailer that is operated in a truck-tractor and semitrailer combination may not be longer than 
59 feet, excluding the length of the towing device.   
(b)  A semitrailer or trailer that is operated in a truck-tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combination (i.e. 
two towed trailers) may not be longer than 28-1/2 feet, excluding the length of the towing device.   
Source:  Texas DMV Length Limits Brochure 
621.205 – Maximum Length of Vehicle Combinations 
(a)  A combination of not more than three vehicles, including a truck and semitrailer, truck and trailer, 
truck-tractor and semitrailer and trailer, or a truck-tractor and two trailers, may be coupled together if 
the combination of vehicles is not longer than 65 feet. 
Source:  Texas DMV Length Limits Brochure 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 240 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Source:  Texas DMV Length Limits Brochure 
(b)  A passenger car or another motor vehicle that has an unloaded weight of less than 2,500 pounds 
may not be coupled with more than one other vehicle or towing device at one time.  A towing device is 
defined as a car dolly that supports one end of the towed vehicle off the road. 
A motor vehicle, including a passenger car, that has an unloaded weight of 2,500 pounds or more may 
be coupled with a towing device and one other vehicle. 
If red vehicle’s weight is less than 2,500 pounds – this is illegal 
If red vehicle’s weight is 2,500 or more – this is legal 
621.206 – Maximum Extended Length of Load 
(a)  A vehicle or combination of vehicles may not carry a load that extends more than three feet beyond 
its front or, except as permitted by other law, more than four feet beyond its rear.  
Note:  even if properly marked, a load 
extension beyond 3’ to the front and 4’ 
to the rear is illegal unless the vehicle is 
specifically excepted by law. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 241 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Reference – 547.382 – this section describes the required equipment for a load extension when the 
extension is permitted by law (some vehicles are specifically permitted to have load extensions beyond 
the limits in this section – most of these exceptions are described in TRC Chapter 622). 
(b)  the regulation of load extension length does not apply to garbage collection vehicles with front end 
loading attachments and containers. 
621.2061 – Exception to Maximum Extended Length of Load: Certain Motor Vehicles 
A trailer may carry a load that extends more than four feet 
beyond the rear of the trailer if the load consists of a motor 
vehicle that: 
(1)  is designed and intended to be carried at the rear of 
the trailer; 
(2)  is used or intended to be used to load or unload a 
commodity on or off the trailer; 
(3)  does not extend more than seven feet beyond the 
rear of the trailer;  and 
(4)  complies with each applicable federal motor carrier 
safety regulation. 
Maximum Length of Vehicle Summary 
May extend more than 4’ beyond the rear 
A motor vehicle generally – 45 feet 
A truck tractor – no limit 
A semitrailer towed by a truck tractor – 59 feet 
A semitrailer and trailer combination – 28 ½ feet each 
Overall combination generally – 65 feet 
Overall combination towed by truck tractor – no overall limit (only trailers are limited) 
621.207 – Maximum Height 
A vehicle and its load may not be higher than 14 feet.   
The operator of a vehicle that is higher than 13 feet 6 inches shall ensure that the vehicle will pass 
through each vertical clearance of a structure in its path without touching the structure. 
621.504 – Bridge or Underpass Clearance 
A person commits an offense if the person operates a vehicle over a bridge or through an underpass 
unless the height of the vehicle, including load, is less than the vertical clearance of the structure as 
shown by the records of the Texas Department of Transportation.   
This offense can be enhanced to a Class B Misdemeanor if the person is not in compliance with all 
applicable licenses and permits for the vehicle. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 242 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Chapter 622 – Special Provisions and Exceptions for Oversize or Overweight Vehicles 
Most of TRC Chapter 622 is not a BPOC learning objective, however you should be aware that this 
chapter describes numerous exceptions for the normal length, width, and weight limitations: 
Subchapter B – Vehicles Transporting Ready-Mixed Concrete 
Subchapter C – Vehicles Transporting Milk 
Subchapter D – Vehicles Transporting Timber or Timber Products 
Subchapter E – Vehicles Transporting Electric Power Transmission Poles 
Subchapter F – Vehicles Transporting Poles or Pipes 
Subchapter G – Special Mobile Equipment 
Subchapter I – Vehicles Transporting Certain Agricultural Products or Equipment 
Subchapter J – Certain Vehicles Transporting Recyclable Materials 
Subchapter Y – Miscellaneous Length and Width Exceptions (Road Machinery, Farm Tractors, 
Implements of Husbandry, Water Well Drilling Equipment, Fire Department Vehicles, 
Fertilizer Vehicles, Recreational Vehicle Appurtenances) 
Subchapter Z – Miscellaneous Weight Exceptions (Oil Field Service Equipment, Vehicles Transporting 
Seed Cotton or Chile Pepper Modules, Tow Trucks, and Vehicles with Idle Reduction 
Systems) 
The following two sections are BPOC learning objectives: 
622.901 – Width Exceptions 
(1) Highway Building/Maintenance Machinery 
When traveling during daylight on a public highway other than an interstate highway or for not more 
than 50 miles on an interstate highway. 
(2) Farm Vehicle During Daylight 
When traveling during daylight on a public highway other than an interstate highway or traveling for not 
more than 50 miles on an interstate highway if the vehicle is a farm tractor or implement of husbandry; 
or a vehicle on which a farm tractor, implement of husbandry, or equipment used in the harvesting and 
production of timber, other than a tractor, implement, or equipment being transported from one dealer 
to another, is being moved by the owner of the tractor, implement, or equipment or by an agent or 
employee of the owner. 
(3) Water Well Drilling during Daylight 
Machinery that is used solely for drilling water wells that is traveling during daylight on a public highway 
other than an interstate highway or for not more than 50 miles on an interstate highway. 
(4) Fire Department Vehicle 
(5)  Fertilizer vehicle registered under Section 502.431 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 243 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(6)  Recreational vehicle exceeding width limitation if the excess width is attributable to an 
appurtenance that extends six inches or less beyond a fender (awning, grab handle, lighting equipment, 
or a vent). 
622.902 – Length Exceptions 
There are numerous vehicles to which the length limitation in 621.203 and 205 do not apply.  Some of 
these vehicles are described in 622.902:  
(1)  Machinery used exclusively for drilling water wells 
(2)  Fire Department Vehicle 
(3)  a vehicle or combination of vehicles operated exclusively in the territory of a municipality or a 
combination of vehicles operated by a municipality used in connection with an established service to 
the municipality; 
(4)  a truck-tractor, truck-tractor combination, or truck-trailer combination exclusively transporting 
machinery, materials, and equipment used in the construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities, 
including pipelines, that are used for the discovery, production, and processing of natural gas or 
petroleum; 
(5)  a drive-away saddle mount vehicle transporter combination or a drive-away saddle mount with full 
mount vehicle transporter combination as long as the overall length is not more than 97 feet and there 
are not more than three saddlemounted vehicles; 
(6)  the combination of a tow truck and another vehicle towing directly to the nearest authorized place 
of repair, terminal, or destination of unloading; 
(7)  a vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport a harvest machine that is used in farm 
custom harvesting operations on a farm if the overall length of the vehicle or combination is not longer 
than 75 feet if the vehicle is traveling on a highway that is part of the national system of interstate and 
defense highways or the federal aid primary highway system; or 81-1/2 feet if the vehicle is not traveling 
on a highway that is part of the national system of interstate and defense highways or the federal aid 
primary highway system; or  
(8)  a truck-tractor operated in combination with a semitrailer and trailer or semitrailer and semitrailer if 
the combination is used to transport a harvest machine that is used in farm custom harvesting 
operations on a farm. 
(9) a towaway trailer transporter combination if the overall length of the combination is not longer 
than 82 feet. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 244 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.6 – CHAPTER 661 – PROTECTIVE HEADGEAR FOR MOTORCYCLE OPERATORS AND 
PASSENGERS 
BPOC Objective 22.22 – Given a driving situation determine if a violation exists as it applies to the 
operation of motorcycles. 
661.001 – Definitions 
(1)  Motorcycle – means a motor vehicle designed to propel itself with not more than three wheels in 
contact with the ground, and having a saddle for the use of the rider.  The term does not include a 
tractor or a three-wheeled vehicle equipped with a cab or occupant compartment, seat, and seat belt 
and designed to contain the operator in the cab or occupant compartment. 
Why is this Important?  A vehicle that meets this definition will be subject to the helmet law. 
(2)  Department – the Department of Public Safety.  
661.0015 – Protective Headgear for Autocycle 
(b)  for helmet purposes, treat autocycles like motorcycles unless they are fully or partially enclosed. 
Fully or partially enclosed autocycles are not subject to helmet laws. 
661.003 – Offenses Relating to Not Wearing Protective Headgear 
Protective headgear is required for motorcycle operators and passengers, although there is a significant 
exception. 
Exception – If someone is 21 years of age or older they are not required to wear a helmet if they have 
completed a motorcycle safety training course or they are covered by health insurance that will provide 
for their care if they are incapacitated by an injury related to motorcycling.  
A rider or passenger who displays a Motorcycle Safety Training completion certificate or some evidence 
of a health insurance plan should be considered to be exempt from the helmet requirement. 
Anyone under 21 years of age is required to wear protective headgear without exception.  Each 
person not wearing a helmet when required is committing a violation.  Passengers in violation can be 
issued a citation, however the operator may also be cited for carrying passengers without helmets. 
What is “approved headgear”?  A US Department of Transportation approved helmet.  661.002 directs 
DPS to establish minimum safety standards for motorcycle headgear.  In Texas DPS Administrative Code 
(Title 37, Part 1, Rule 21.6), DPS adopted the federal standards for motorcycle helmets found in FMVSS 
571.218.  An approved helmet should have a “DOT” sticker on the back of the helmet indicating it meets 
safety standards. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 245 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 246 
Apply It: 
 
You stop this motorcyclist for speeding. He is 28 years old and 
has no health insurance. 
The operator has completed a motorcycle safety course. 
Is the motorcyclist committing a violation for not wearing 
approved headgear? 
                                  YES                       NO  
 
 
 
 
You stop this motorcyclist for speeding. He is 20 years old. 
The operator has completed a motorcycle safety course and he 
has health insurance. 
Is the motorcyclist committing a violation for not wearing 
approved headgear? 
                                 YES                       NO  
 
 
 
 
You stop this motorcyclist for speeding. The passenger is 22 
years old. 
The passenger has no health insurance and has not completed a 
motorcycle safety course. 
Is a violation being committed?            YES                  NO 
Who is committing the violation? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since we’re talking about Motorcycles 
The BPOC teaching objectives contain the following information regarding motorcycle operator 
profiling: 
Motorcycle Operator Profiling Awareness 
The popularity of the motorcycle as a primary means of transportation has grown in the past decade.  
More and more people are buying, and riding motorcycles and they represent all facets of society.  All 
races, genders, and occupations are represented in this area.  There is no such thing as "the typical 
biker" no more so than trying to describe “the typical criminal type” or “the typical Texan”.  As an 
officer, remember "Violators" are defined by their actions not how they look. 
Classes of Street Motorcycles officers may encounter 
• Sport Bikes – factory built motorcycles that resemble professional racing motorcycles.  This style 
of motorcycles generally attracts younger riders 
• Street Bikes – regular motorcycles that range from 250cc to 1100cc engines.  The riders of these 
bikes are in all age groups 
• Cruiser Class – "Top End" motorcycles that average 1100cc to 1800cc in size and usually are 
equipped with windshields, saddlebags, and accessories.  Due to their price, their riders are 
usually older 
Differences between a Motorcycle Club and a Criminal Street Gang 
A motorcycle club is a group of people that ride motorcycles in organized activities.  They may wear 
distinctive clothing to identify their club. Their primary activities involve the sport of motorcycling. 
Criminal Street Gang (PC 71.01(d)):  Three or more persons having a common identifying sign or symbol 
or an identifiable leadership who continuously or regularly associate in the commission of criminal 
activities. 
Common misconceptions and beliefs associated with the motorcycle operator 
• Sport Bike riders are speeders that ride dangerously. 
• Bikers (general term) use narcotics, drink, raise hell, and probably have outstanding warrants. 
• Cruiser Class riders are the "station wagon" set of the motorcycle world.  These "mom & pop" 
riders generally pose no threat. 
• Motorcycle Clubs that "fly their colors" (wear their club jackets) are "outlaw bikers" that are 
showing their disrespect for law enforcement and are in effect "claiming new turf" by showing 
the colors. 
• Any biker not wearing a helmet is breaking the law. 
• Bikers are generally lower income to middle class laborers, juvenile delinquents, and 
troublemakers. 
Stopping Motorcycle Operators 
• Be sure that the reason for the stop is an identified violation of the law and not due to stereotype. 
• Follow the 7-step violator contact protocol, but have the operator remain astride his motorcycle 
with the kickstand up (this keeps the operator occupied with balancing the motorcycle and 
reduces the possibility of attempting anything with the officer). 
• Remain professional and deal with the violation and not the appearance of the operator or 
perceived prejudices or attitudes. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 247 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.7 – CHAPTER 664 – ELECTRIC BICYCLES 
664.001 – Definitions 
(4) Electric Bicycle – a bicycle with: 
• fully operable pedals 
• an electric motor of fewer than 750 watts; and 
• a top assisted speed of 28 miles per hour or less. 
Reference 551.107 – a person must be at least 15 YOA to operate a class 3 electric bicycle. 
There are three classes of electric bicycles depending on the exact design and operational specifications. 
SECTION 7.8 – CHAPTER 681 – PRIVILEGED PARKING 
BPOC Objective 22.23 – Review the regulations related to privileged parking. 
681.002 – Disabled Parking Placard 
The department (DMV) provides for the issuance of a disabled parking placard to a person with a 
disability.  The placards are furnished to the county tax collector/assessor office for issuance. 
A disabled parking placard may be blue or red depending on the nature of the disability.  These placards 
must meet the other specifications described in this section. 
Blue Placard – permanent disability 
Red Placard – temporary disability 
681.0031 – Applicant's Identification 
An applicant for a disabled parking placard must furnish their Texas driver license or identification card 
number, a military ID, or some other state driver license or identification.  The first four digits of the 
applicant’s driver’s license or ID number must be placed on the disabled parking placard. 
This is necessary because the vehicle must be operated by or for the person with a disability to use 
disabled parking spaces.  From an enforcement standpoint, an officer may need to determine whether 
or not the disabled person is present when the vehicle is utilizing a disabled parking space. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 248 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
681.006 – Parking Privileges: Persons with Disabilities 
(a)  A vehicle may utilize disabled parking spaces if the vehicle is operated by or for a disabled person 
and the vehicle displays a disabled license plate or placard. 
(b)  The owner of a vehicle is exempt from the payment of a fee imposed by a governmental unit for 
parking at a parking meter if the vehicle is operated by or for a disabled person and the vehicle displays 
a disabled license plate or placard. 
(d)  This section does not allow parking in places where parking is prohibited. 
681.008 – Parking Privileges; Certain Veterans and Military Award Recipients 
Changes effective 1/1/22, from Senate Bill 792 – Vehicles registered with “Disabled Veteran” license 
plates only receive disabled parking privileges if the license plate bears the international symbol of 
access.   
Previously, all Disabled Veteran license plates were granted privileged parking privileges, however this 
changed January 1, 2022.   
Texas DMV is tasked with establishing a procedure for issuing Disabled Veteran license plates bearing 
the international symbol of access. 
681.010 – Enforcement 
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by peace officers and parking enforcement personnel who 
are not peace officers.  
Security officers commissioned under the Occupations Code and employed by the owner of a private 
property may also enforce this chapter if parking spaces are appropriately designated as disabled 
parking spaces. 
681.0101 – Enforcement by Certain Appointed Persons 
Parking enforcement personnel who are not peace officers may enforce disabled parking regulations 
once properly trained by the political subdivision that employs them.  Such personnel are not peace 
officers and are not permitted to carry a weapon.  They must be US citizens of good moral character. 
681.011 – Offenses; Presumption  
(a)   A person commits an offense if (all must be present): 
• Vehicle is displaying disabled parking plates or placard 
• Vehicle is standing in a disabled parking space 
• Vehicle is not being operated by or for a person with disabilities 
(b)  A person commits an offense if (both must be present): 
• Vehicle is standing in a disabled parking space 
• Vehicle is not displaying disabled parking plates or placard 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 249 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
(c)  A person commits an offense if they stand a vehicle in a position that blocks architectural 
improvements for persons with disabilities. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if they lend a disabled parking placard that is used in violation of 
681.011. 
(e)  In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed the vehicle owner is the person who left the 
vehicle standing at the time the offense occurred. 
(f-1) Although disabled parking spaces are required to be marked in a certain way, it is not a defense to 
prosecution for a disabled parking violation when the parking space is not marked to the exact 
specifications described in 681.009 as long as the space is clearly distinguishable as being designated for 
persons with disabilities. 
(f-2) A peace officer may issue a warning only for a disabled parking violation if the parking space does 
not have a sign identifying the space in accordance with the requirements in 681.009. Disabled parking 
spaces marked only with paint on the ground should not result in a citation against a violator. 
(g)  The fine for these offenses is $500 - $750.  Subsequent convictions earn higher fines and the 
possibility of community service. 
(l)  A person commits an offense if (all must be present): 
• Vehicle displays disabled license plates or a disabled parking placard 
• Vehicle is parked in a location where disabled parking plates/placards create an exemption from 
parking fees and does not pay a fee 
• Vehicle is not being operated by or for a person with a disability 
(m) A person commits an offense if (both must be present): 
• Vehicle stands in a disabled parking space displaying Disabled Veteran license plates 
• International symbol of access is not displayed on the license plate or on a rearview mirror 
placard 
Note:  This section makes it an offense to illegally “stand” a vehicle in a disabled parking spot.  “Stand” 
or “Standing” is defined in 681.001 – to halt an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily 
while receiving or discharging a passenger.  In other words, if a vehicle without disabled plates pulled 
into a disabled parking spot to pick up or discharge a passenger, the vehicle would not be considered to 
be “standing” and would not be in violation of this section.  If they remained in the space after 
discharging the passenger, they would be in violation. 
681.012 – Seizure and Revocation of Placards 
A law enforcement officer who believes that an offense under Section 681.011(a) or (d) (using or lending 
a disabled parking placard to park in a disabled parking space when not utilized for or by a person with a 
disability) has occurred in the officer's presence shall seize any disabled parking placard involved in the 
offense.   
Not later than 48 hours after the seizure, the officer shall determine whether probable cause existed to 
believe that the offense was committed.  If the officer does not find that probable cause existed, the 
officer shall promptly return each placard to the person from whom it was seized.  If the officer finds 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 250 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
that probable cause existed, the officer, not later than the fifth day after the date of the seizure, shall 
destroy the placard and notify the department. 
Note:  This section refers only to placards.  Officers should not seize disabled parking license plates 
under this section. 
Once a placard has been seized under this section, it is considered to be revoked. 
SECTION 7.9 – CHAPTER 683 – ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 
BPOC Objective 22.24 – Describe the regulations related to abandoned motor vehicles.  
683.002 – Abandoned Motor Vehicle 
Under 683.011, an officer is permitted to tow/take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle.  This 
section describes six vehicles that meet the definition of “abandoned”.  The vehicle: 
1) is inoperable, is more than five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for 
more than 48 hours; 
2) has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
3) has remained on private property without the consent of the owner for more than 48 hours; 
4) has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a highway for more than 48 hours; 
5) has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project;  or 
6) is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under Section 644.153(r) (commercial motor vehicle 
impounded by the Department for unpaid administrative fees and left at a storage facility for 
more than 10 days). 
Note:  Four of these circumstances have a 48 hour timeframe attached.  One has a 24 hour timeframe 
attached (unattended on a turnpike right-of-way).  If you see a question about timeframe for an 
abandoned vehicle and it is not on a turnpike, the answer is probably 48 hours. 
Reference 545.305 – other times an officer may tow a vehicle 
683.011 – Authority to Take Abandoned Motor Vehicle into Custody 
A law enforcement agency may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or 
outboard motor found on public or private property.  A motor vehicle must meet the criteria to be 
abandoned under 683.002. 
683.012 – Taking Abandoned Motor Vehicle into Custody: Notice 
A law enforcement agency shall send notice of abandonment to the last known registered owner and 
lienholder of each motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by the 
agency.   
(b) This notice must be sent no later than the 10th day after the abandoned vehicle was taken into 
custody. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 251 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.10 – CHAPTER 708 – DRIVER RESPONSIBILITY PROGRAM 
BPOC Objective 22.21 – Examine the Drivers Responsibility Program. 
The Driver Responsibility Program (DRP) was enacted in 2003 and was found in Chapter 708 of the Texas 
Transportation Code. It established a system that authorized the Texas Department of Public Safety 
(DPS) to assess surcharges to an individual based on certain traffic offenses.   
This program was repealed as of September 1, 2019. At that time all DRP surcharge assessments were to 
be waived and no future charges were assessed. However, individuals will still be responsible for any 
other suspensions, fines, or fees on their driving record not related to the DRP.  Visit 
http://www.texasfailuretoappear.com/search.php if you have questions concerning this past program 
or how past DRP involvement appears on an individual’s driving record. 
SECTION 7.11 – CHAPTER 724 – IMPLIED CONSENT 
BPOC Objective 22.29 – Discuss the concept of Implied Consent. 
724.002 – Applicability 
Chapter 724 provides for the suspension of a person’s Texas driver’s license when they are arrested for 
driving or boating while intoxicated or DUI – minor and they refuse to provide a blood or breath 
specimen for analysis. 
This suspension only applies to a person operating a motor vehicle or operating a watercraft powered 
with an engine having a manufacturer's rating of 50 horsepower or above. 
Note: the 50 horsepower language in this section applies only to a watercraft.  A person’s driver’s 
license can be suspended for driving a motor vehicle while intoxicated regardless of engine size.  A 
person’s license can only be suspended for operating a watercraft while intoxicated if the watercraft has 
an engine displacement of 50 HP or more (Reference 724.042(2)(A) and (B)). 
724.011 – Consent to Taking of Specimen 
If a person is arrested for driving while intoxicated, boating while intoxicated, or DUI – minor, the person 
is deemed to have consented to submit to the taking of one or more specimens of the person's breath 
or blood for analysis to determine the alcohol concentration or the presence in the person's body of a 
controlled substance, drug, dangerous drug, or other substance. This means if a person withdraws this 
consent at the time the specimen is requested they are subject to driver license suspension penalties. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 252 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
724.012 – Taking of Specimen 
May Request a Specimen 
(a) One or more specimens MAY be taken for instances of Driving While Intoxicated, Boating While 
Intoxicated, or Driving Under the Influence –Minor. 
• An officer may request a specimen and if the person refuses, a specimen does not have to be 
taken. 
Shall Require a Specimen of Blood 
(a-1) A peace officer SHALL require the taking of a specimen of the person's BLOOD if:  
1) the officer arrests the person for a DWI/BWI offense,  
2) the person refuses to voluntarily provide a specimen,   
3) the person was the operator of a motor vehicle or a watercraft involved in a collision that the 
officer reasonably believes occurred as a result of the offense; and  
4) at the time of the arrest, the officer reasonably believes that as a direct result of the collision 
any individual has died, will die, or has suffered serious bodily injury. 
Note:  The idea here is to mandate the collection of a blood specimen in the above circumstances.   
Shall Require a Specimen of Breath or Blood 
(b)  An officer SHALL require a specimen of breath or blood from arrested people if: 
1) the officer arrests the person for a DWI/BWI offense,  
2) the person refuses to voluntarily provide a specimen,   
3) One of the following circumstances is present: 
• The person caused a crash and another person received bodily injury requiring transport to a 
medical facility for treatment. 
• The offense is DWI With Child Passenger < 15 years of age; 
• The person has previous conviction for DWI with Child, Intox. Assault, or Intox. Manslaughter; 
• The person has two or more previous DWI related convictions. 
You must require a mandatory specimen Under (a-1) or (b).  Now what? 
(e) A peace officer may not require the taking of a specimen under this section unless the officer: 
1) Obtains a warrant directing that the specimen be taken; or 
2) Has probable cause to believe that exigent circumstances exist. 
In most circumstances, this means you will need to obtain a warrant for a blood draw.  A blood draw 
without a warrant based on exigent circumstances must be very clearly articulated. 
Case Law –  Missouri vs. McNeely 133 S.Ct. 1552 (2013) 
The Supreme Court ruled there was inadequate exigency when the officer took a mandatory 
specimen without a warrant.  Officers must consider availability of a qualified magistrate, metabolism 
rate of alcohol, and assistance available from other officers prior to taking a specimen without a 
warrant due to exigency.  This Supreme Court ruling was upheld and cited by the Texas Court of 
Criminal Appeals in the ruling State v. Villarreal. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 253 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 254 
DPS Guidance on Exigent Circumstances 
DPS Legal Bulletin – January/February 2016 – Courts Limit the Implied Consent Law 
Can’t Get Consent or Warrant—Proving Exigent Circumstances 
Frankly, it is not easy to prove that exigent circumstances justified the taking of blood without consent 
or a warrant. Since McNeely only one reported case has upheld a warrantless blood draw based on 
exigent circumstances. The case is Garcia v. State issued in May 2015 by the Fourteenth Court of 
Appeals.   … 
The Garcia case shows that it is not enough to tell the court that it would take two or three hours to 
get the warrant. Instead, the state will have to show the court every factor that prevented the officer 
from obtaining a search warrant in a reasonably timely manner, and that there was no reasonable 
alternative. 
 
Excerpt from memo regarding establishing exigent circumstances: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 255 
724.014 – Person Incapable of Refusal 
(a)  A person who is dead, unconscious, or otherwise incapable of refusal is considered not to have 
withdrawn the consent provided by Section 724.011.  
Case Law – Ruiz v. State – the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals found that taking a blood specimen from 
an unconscious person constituted a 4th Amendment violation.  If a suspect is unconscious, officers 
should get a warrant for the blood specimen unless there are exigent circumstances. 
(b)  If the person is dead, a specimen may be taken by the county medical examiner or the examiner's 
designated agent, or a licensed mortician (see note below). 
Note: Although 724.014 permits the use of a mortician or medical examiner to draw a blood specimen 
from a deceased individual (as opposed to the list of authorized persons who can draw blood described 
in 724.017), this practice is not advisable. Chapter 724 requires that the subject of the blood draw be 
“arrested” for an offense prior to request of the specimen. A deceased person cannot be arrested, so a 
strong argument can be made that nothing in Chapter 724 can be applied to a deceased person. 
The Texas DPS Officer of General Counsel concurs and advises against the use of a mortician or medical 
examiner for a blood draw from a deceased individual. As stated in an issue of the DPS Legal Bulletin 
(December 2005): The Dallas Court of Appeals held in Knisley v. State that before an officer can obtain a 
specimen of breath or blood from a person under the authority of Section 724.014, the officer has to 
have probable cause the person was driving while intoxicated and the officer must first arrest the 
suspect. Arresting a dead driver is problematical to say the least. Therefore, Knisley would seem to 
foreclose an officer from relying on Section 724.014 as authority for obtaining a blood. 
In a subsequent legal opinion, the Office of General Counsel stated: 
1. As the Bulletin indicates, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure Article 49.10 (j)(1) (“CCP 
49.10(j)(1)”) also authorizes a justice of the peace (“JP”) to order blood be drawn from a 
person who died from a collision if the JP determines circumstances indicate the deceased 
may have been driving while intoxicated. Getting a JP to order the deceased person’s blood 
draw pursuant to CCP 49.10(j)(1) will often be the easiest option. Drawing a deceased’s 
blood during autopsy is also standard practice.  
1. THP personnel should encourage JPs to order autopsies in fatal crashes. For fiscal 
and other reasons, many JPs are unfortunately reluctant to order autopsies in all 
fatal crashes.  
2. If a JP is disinclined to order an autopsy on the dead driver(s), THP personnel 
should provide the JP the evidence supporting a finding the dead driver was 
intoxicated and request the JP order a blood specimen pursuant to CCP 49.10(j)(1).  
 
In other words, best practice for obtaining a blood specimen from a deceased driver is for the Justice 
of the Peace to order a blood draw as authorized in the Code of Criminal Procedure, not a blood draw 
under 724.014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
724.015 – Information Provided by Officer Before Requesting Specimen 
Officers requesting a specimen must first provide information to the suspect regarding the specimen 
and the consequences of refusing to provide a specimen.  This information is provided on the DIC-24 
Statutory Warning (example below).  The reading of this warning must be video-recorded if the suspect 
is under 17 years of age. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 256 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
724.016 – Breath Specimen 
A breath specimen taken at the request or order of a peace officer must be taken and analyzed under 
rules of the department by an individual possessing a certificate issued by the department certifying 
that the individual is qualified to perform the analysis.  Intoxilyzer operators are certified in the 
Department’s Intoxilyzer certification course to satisfy this requirement. 
724.017 – Taking of Blood Specimen 
Only the following may take a blood specimen at the request of a peace officer under Chapter 724: 
1) a physician 
2) a qualified technician 
3) a registered professional nurse 
4) a licensed vocational nurse 
5) a licensed or certified emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical 
technician-paramedic authorized to take a blood specimen. 
Note: under (c), an EMT intermediate or paramedic may only take a blood specimen for analysis 
if authorized by the medical director of the agency that employs the paramedic.  The medical 
director must establish protocol for the agency’s EMTs to draw a blood specimen for analysis. 
A “qualified technician” (#2 above) is not well defined in the TRC, however numerous courts have held 
that a phlebotomist meets the requirements of a “qualified technician” due to their specialized training.  
Most blood draws taken at a hospital are performed by a phlebotomist. 
(a-1) The specimen is required to be collected in a sanitary place.  
(b)  The person who takes the blood specimen and the facility where the specimen is taken is immune 
from civil liability if recognized medical procedures are followed. 
(c-2) If an EMT takes a blood specimen, the officer requesting the specimen must observe the taking of 
the specimen and must immediately take possession of the specimen after the blood draw. 
(d)  A person whose blood is taken under Chapter 724 at a hospital is not considered to be present in the 
hospital for medical screening or care.  In other words, they do not have to be admitted into the hospital 
as a patient for the purposes of the blood draw. 
724.018 – Furnishing Information Concerning Results 
On the request of a person who has given a specimen, full information concerning the analysis of the 
specimen shall be made available to the person or the person's attorney. 
724.019 – Additional Analysis by Request 
A person who submits to the taking of a specimen at the request or order of a peace officer may, within 
a reasonable time not to exceed two hours after the arrest, have a physician, qualified technician, 
chemist, or registered professional nurse selected by the person take for analysis an additional 
specimen of the person's blood.   
BPOC Student Manual - Page 257 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
The person shall be allowed a reasonable opportunity to contact a person to collect the specimen.  The 
failure or inability to obtain an additional specimen for analysis under this section does not preclude the 
admission of evidence relating to the analysis of the specimen taken at the request or order of the 
peace officer. 
724.031 – Statement Requested on Refusal 
If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to the taking of a specimen, the peace officer 
shall request that the person sign a statement the person was informed of the consequences of not 
submitting to the taking of a specimen and the person refused to submit to the taking of a specimen.   
This is accomplished by having the person sign the DIC-24 Statutory Warning that was read to them 
prior to the specimen request (example below). 
724.032 – Officer's Duties For License Suspension; Written Refusal Report 
Following a specimen refusal (or an alcohol concentration of more than 0.08, per Chapter 524), the 
arresting officer must do the following things: 
1) serve notice of license suspension or denial on the person – DIC-25 (example below) 
2) make a written report of the refusal to the director of the department within 5 business days. 
This report is called the DIC-23 report. 
Word Association:  Written Report of Refusal   DIC-23   5 Business Days 
Texas DIC-25 Form – Notice of Suspension 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 258 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
SECTION 7.12 – HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE - CHAPTER 365 - LITTER 
BPOC Objective 22.5 – Define dispose and litter in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
HSC 365.011 – Definitions 
(5) Dispose and dump – to discharge, deposit, inject, spill, leak, or place litter on or into land or water. 
Why is this Important?  This is the action associated with the littering offenses. 
(6) Litter 
(A)  Decayable Waste – from a public or private establishment, residence, or restaurant, including 
animal and vegetable waste material from a market or storage facility handling or storing produce or 
other food products, or the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food.  DOES NOT 
INCLUDE sewage, body wastes, or industrial by-products. 
(B)  Nondecayable solid waste – (except ashes) consisting of: 
(i)  combustible waste material (such as paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, 
rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, or similar materials); 
(ii)  noncombustible waste material (such as glass, crockery, tin or aluminum cans, metal 
furniture, and similar materials);  and 
(iii)  discarded or worn-out manufactured materials and machinery (such as motor vehicles and 
parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm implements, building or construction materials, 
appliances, and scrap metal). 
Word Association:  Litter    decayable waste   and nondecayable solid waste 
(8) Public Highway – the entire width between property lines of a road, street, way, thoroughfare, 
bridge, public beach, or park in this state, not privately owned or controlled, if any part of the road, 
street, way, thoroughfare, bridge, public beach, or park is: 
(A)  opened to the public for vehicular traffic; 
(B)  is used as a public recreational area;  or 
(C)  is under the state's legislative jurisdiction through its police power. 
HSC 365.012 – Illegal Dumping; Discarding Lighted Materials; Criminal Penalties 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person disposes or allows or permits the disposal of litter or 
other solid waste at a place that is not an approved solid waste site.   
(a-1)  A person commits an offense if the person discards lighted litter, including a match, cigarette, or 
cigar and a fire is ignited as a result.  This is a Class B Misdemeanor. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person receives litter or other solid waste for disposal at a place 
that is not an approved solid waste site. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person transports litter or other solid waste to a place that is not 
an approved solid waste site for disposal at the site. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 259 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            BPOC Student Manual - Page 260 
Level of the Offense – The level of offense is based on the weight/volume of the litter: 
Less than 5 pounds/5 gallons – Class C Misdemeanor 
More than 5 pounds, less than 500 pounds – Class B Misdemeanor 
More than 5 gallons, less than 100 cubic feet 
500 pounds or more, less than 1000 pounds – Class A Misdemeanor 
100 cubic feet or more, less than 200 cubic feet 
1000 pounds or more/ 200 cubic feet or more – State Jail Felony 
(h) If a person has been previously convicted, the punishment is increased to the next highest category. 
(j)  unauthorized disposal of litter or other solid waste in a dumpster or similar receptacle is considered 
an offense under this section.  
Apply It: 
You are on patrol and you see someone toss a fast food cup from their 
vehicle.  You conduct a traffic stop for littering. 
What level of offense has the person committed? 
 
 
 
You are on patrol and you round a corner on a county road.  You see a 
pickup stopped in the ditch and a man is throwing old tires out.  There are 
four tires in the ditch weighing a total of 57 pounds.   
What level of offense has the person committed? 
 
 
You are on patrol following a pickup.  You notice several pieces of paper 
and trash flying up out of the bed of the pickup due to wind movement.   
Is the operator of the pickup committing a violation for littering? 
YES                      NO 
 
 
You are on patrol and you conduct a traffic stop on a vehicle for 
speeding.  As the vehicle is coming to a stop, the driver finishes his 
cigarette and flicks it out his window into the ditch. 
Is this littering?            YES                        NO 
What level of offense has the driver committed?  _______________ 
As you’re talking to the driver, a grass fire is ignited by the cigarette.   
What level of offense has the driver committed?  _______________ 
MODULE 7 REVIEW QUESTIONS 
Answer each question with the most correct response.  Next to each question, write the section number 
of the TRC section where the answer can be found. 
Chapter 552 and 552A 
1. If a pedestrian wants to cross in a crosswalk at an intersection where there is not a specific 
pedestrian control signal, the pedestrian has no traffic control and may cross at any time. 
a. True 
b. False 
2. If a sidewalk is present, a pedestrian walking along a highway is not required to use the sidewalk 
as long as they walk along the left side of the roadway facing approaching traffic. 
a. True 
b. False 
3. A pedestrian does not commit a violation if they begin crossing in a crosswalk after the 
pedestrian control signal displays a flashing red hand as long as they make it across before the 
solid red hand is displayed. 
a. True 
b. False 
4. The maximum speed for a motorized mobility device is ______________.  A motorized mobility 
device is treated like a _______________________. 
Chapter 600 
5. Who is responsible for picking up glass and injurious substances left in a ditch by a wrecked car? 
a. The owner of the vehicle 
b. The firefighters who respond to the scene 
c. The police officers who respond to the scene 
d. TXDOT 
e. The person who removes the wrecked vehicle 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 261 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Chapter 601 
6. List the five acceptable methods of establishing financial responsibility: 
1.  ___________________________________________________________ 
2.  ___________________________________________________________ 
3.  ___________________________________________________________ 
4.  ___________________________________________________________ 
5.  ___________________________________________________________ 
7. Prior to issuing a citation for failure to maintain financial responsibility, a peace officer must 
attempt to verify financial responsibility through the Financial Responsibility Verification 
Program. 
a. True 
b. False 
8. If a person maintains financial responsibility by depositing cash with the state or the county 
judge, the deposit must be in the amount of ___________________________. 
9. A person must have at least 26 vehicles registered in their name to be a candidate for self
insurance. 
a. True 
b. False 
Chapter 621 
10. The maximum width for a passenger vehicle is ______________________.  A passenger vehicle 
may have a load that extends _______ inches to the left or __________ inches to the right. 
11. The maximum width for a vehicle that is not a passenger vehicle is _____________________. 
12. List the maximum allowable length for each vehicle described below: 
A motor vehicle – ________________ 
A truck tractor – ________________ 
A semitrailer towed by a truck tractor – ________________ 
A semitrailer and trailer combination –  ________________ 
Overall combination generally – ________________ 
Overall combination towed by truck tractor – ________________ 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 262 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
Chapter 661 
13. A motorcycle operator or passenger under 21 years of age must wear an approved helmet 
without exception when riding on the highway. 
a. True 
b. False 
14. List the two ways a person at least 21 years of age could be excepted from motorcycle helmet 
requirements: 
1.  _________________________________________________________________________ 
2.  _________________________________________________________________________ 
Chapter 664 
15. An electric bicycle has a top assisted speed of _____________ MPH or less. 
Chapter 681 
16. A vehicle displaying disabled license plates may park in a disabled parking spot even if the 
vehicle is not being operated by or for the person with a disability at the time. 
a. True 
b. False 
17. A person with a disability may park in a disabled parking spot even if they have not obtained 
disabled license plates or a disabled parking placard. 
a. True 
b. False 
Chapter 683 
18. A vehicle can be considered abandoned after it has been left unattended on a highway right-of
way for more than _______________ hours.  If the highway is a turnpike project, an unattended 
vehicle can be considered abandoned after ____________ hours. 
Chapter 708 
19. The Texas Driver Responsibility Program was repealed effective __________________________. 
Chapter 724 
20. All reports related to a DWI suspect’s refusal to provide a specimen shall be forwarded to the 
Department not later than the ____________________________ after the date of arrest. 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 263 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            
21. If a DWI suspect refuses to provide a specimen, an officer required to take a mandatory 
specimen may only take the specimen if the officer: 
1.  ________________________________________________________________________ 
or 
2.  ________________________________________________________________________ 
22. List the five people authorized to take a blood specimen at the request of a peace officer: 
1.  __________________________________________________________ 
2.  __________________________________________________________ 
3.  __________________________________________________________ 
4.  __________________________________________________________ 
5.  __________________________________________________________ 
23. Only non-decayable waste is considered “litter”. 
a. True 
b. False 
24. The level of offense for littering is determined by the: 
a. Size or shape of the litter 
b. Weight or volume of the litter 
c. Flammability of the litter 
d. Smell of the litter 
e. Cost to clean up the litter 
BPOC Student Manual - Page 264 
Texas Highway Patrol - Texas Transportation Code                                                            

================================================================

NOTES:
- This file will be used as the primary source for creating exam-specific questions
- The more complete the content, the better I can tailor the questions to match your actual exam
- Include any practice questions, case studies, or examples from your handout
- Don't worry about formatting - just paste everything you have

After you paste the content, I will:
✓ Analyze all the material to identify key concepts
✓ Create 150+ practice questions that mirror your actual exam
✓ Update the study tool with relevant flashcards
✓ Focus on the most important topics for your Monday exam
✓ Include scenario-based questions like those in your handout
