TCOLE PENAL CODE STUDY CONTENT
=================================

INSTRUCTIONS: Simply copy and paste your study handout content below. 
The system will automatically create flashcards and quiz questions from this content.

Just paste your content here - no special formatting needed!
Example format:

PENAL CODE CHAPTER 22 - ASSAULT OFFENSES

22.01 ASSAULT
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
    (1) intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly causes bodily injury to another;
    (2) intentionally or knowingly threatens another with imminent bodily injury; or
    (3) intentionally or knowingly causes physical contact with another when the person knows or should reasonably believe that the other will regard the contact as offensive or provocative.

(b) An offense under Subsection (a) is a Class C misdemeanor, except that the offense is a Class A misdemeanor if the offense is committed against a person the actor knows is a public servant while the public servant is lawfully discharging an official duty, or in retaliation for an exercise of official power or performance of an official duty as a public servant.

22.02 AGGRAVATED ASSAULT
(a) A person commits an offense if the person commits assault as defined in Section 22.01 and the person:
    (1) causes serious bodily injury to another; or
    (2) uses or exhibits a deadly weapon during the commission of the assault.

(b) An offense under this section is a felony of the second degree, except that the offense is a felony of the first degree if the offense is committed:
    (1) by a public servant acting under color of the servant's office or employment;
    (2) against a person the actor knows is a public servant while the public servant is lawfully discharging an official duty, or in retaliation for an exercise of official power or performance of an official duty as a public servant;
    (3) in retaliation against a witness, prospective witness, or informant;
    (4) against a person the actor knows is a security officer while the security officer is performing a duty as a security officer; or
    (5) against a person the actor knows is emergency services personnel while the person is providing emergency services.

---

PASTE YOUR STUDY HANDOUT CONTENT BELOW:
=======================================

•Instructor Intro if needed 
Introduction 
Property and Trespassing Offenses
 Chapters 28, 30, and 42
 Types of Property Offenses
 Burglary 
Theft
 Criminal Mischief 
Forgery/Fraud
 Identity Theft
 Officers should use the victim’s reasonable value 
estimate for affected property
 Professional Criminal(s) / Thief:
 Profit motive: may commit burglary, white collar, vehicle theft, 
agricultural, and arson crimes
 Operate to minimize chances of observation / lack of eyewitnesses
 Requires planning, direction, and operating skills.
 Type of property stolen may be important clue as they may be 
traced when stolen property is recovered
 “Achilles Heel” of Burglary/Theft is disposal of the property. 
Often work in conjunction with criminal receivers (fences)
 • One who receives and disposes of stolen property on a regular basis.
 Semi-professional (unskilled) thief:
 Profit still underlying motive, but this type may be more interested 
in getting money for drugs
 Targets are determined more by opportunity (cruising robber)
 Less involved in planning or preparation
 Less rational than "professional" counterpart
 More likely to resort to violence against victim
 Presents a special danger when interrupted and cornered
 More prone to violence to try to effect escape
 Burglars
 Same motivation as professional thief
 Ability to gain entry to premises by stealth or defeating locks, alarms
 Ability to plan, direct, and execute an operation
 Business sense - ability to distinguish between valuable and worthless 
items during burglary
 Connections to dispose of fruits of the crime
 • residential premises
 • safe burglary
 Type of burglary may give clues to the suspect identity
 • commercial premises
 • vehicle
 •Direct students to their handouts 
•Unit Goal: Crimes against property and persons and characteristics of these crimes.  
Presentation 
32.7. Discuss various types of property offenses and characteristics of these types of crimes.  
An accomplished thief not only completes the crime but successfully disposes of the property. 
The “Achilles’ Heel” (weakness) of property crime is the disposal of the stolen property. 
Professional Criminal(s) / Professional thief / Penal Code 31.03  
• Profit motive: operate to minimize chances of observation.  
• Lack of eyewitnesses.  
• May be traced when stolen property is recovered.  
• This type requires planning, direction, and operating skills.  
• The type of property stolen may be an important clue.  
• Often work in conjunction with criminal receivers or fences: one who receives and disposes 
of stolen property on a regular basis.  
• May also commit the crimes of burglary, white collar crimes, vehicle theft, agricultural 
crimes, and arson.  
Semi-professional (unskilled) thief:  
• Profit still underlying motive, but this type may be more interested in getting money for 
drugs.  
• Targets are determined more by opportunity (cruising robber)  
• Less involved in planning or preparation  
• More likely to resort to violence against victim.  
• Presents a special danger when interrupted and cornered.  
• More prone to violence to try to effect escape.  
• Less rational than "professional" counterpart  
Burglar:  
• Same motivation as professional thief  
• Has ability to gain entry to premises by stealth or defeating locks, alarms.  
• Ability to plan, direct, and execute an operation.  
• Has business sense - ability to distinguish between valuable and worthless items during 
burglary.  
• Connections to dispose of fruits of the crime.  
• Type of burglary committed may give a clue to suspect identity.  
• Residential premises, Safe burglary, Commercial premises, and Vehicles 
32.8. Identify the characteristics of a street thief.  
Patrol Officers Encounter Street Thieves More Often
 Street thieves may carry weapons & be reckless to avoid arrest
 • Usually stealing for trading material to procure narcotics or alcohol
 • Most dangerous auto thieves
 Professional thief: rarely armed to avoid higher punishments
 • Will try to outwit the officer: 
• Interview techniques & attention to detail will help to detect
 CHAPTER 28: ARSON & PROPERTY 
DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION
 Sec. 28.01. Definitions
 (3)  "Property" means: 
(A)  real property;
 (B)  tangible or intangible personal property, 
including anything severed from land;  or
 (C) document, including money, that represents or 
embodies anything of value.
 28.05.  ACTOR'S INTEREST IN PROPERTY
 It is NO defense to prosecution that the actor has an interest 
in the property damaged or destroyed if another person also 
has an interest that the actor is not entitled to infringe.
 28.06: AMOUNT OF PECUNIARY LOSS.  
(a)  The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter, if the property is 
destroyed, is:
 (1)  the fair market value of the property at the time and place of the 
destruction;  or
 (2)  if the fair market value of the property cannot be ascertained, 
the cost of replacing the property within a reasonable time after the 
destruction.
 (b)  The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter, if the property is 
damaged, is the cost of repairing or restoring the damaged property 
within a reasonable time after the damage occurred.
 Street Thieves:   
• often carry weapons and take reckless chances to avoid apprehension.  
• are usually stealing for trading material to procure narcotics or alcohol.  
• are the most dangerous auto thieves.  
Uniformed officers encounter "street" thieves more often than the truly professional car thief.  
The truly professional thief will rarely be armed since he would get more time for a weapon 
charge than the theft charge. He will try to use his mind to outwit his captor. The better an 
officer becomes at questioning a suspect and catching him in a lie, the better that officer's 
chances are he will catch a professional car thief.  
8.15. Define and apply the elements of crimes against property  
28.01. DEFINITIONS.  
(3) "Property" means: 
(A) real property; 
(B) tangible or intangible personal property, including anything severed from land; or 
(C) a document, including money, that represents or embodies anything of value. 
28.05. ACTOR'S INTEREST IN PROPERTY. It is no defense to prosecution under this chapter that 
the actor has an interest in the property damaged or destroyed if another person also has an 
interest that the actor is not entitled to infringe. 
28.06. AMOUNT OF PECUNIARY LOSS. (a) The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter, if 
the property is destroyed, is: 
(1) the fair market value of the property at the time and place of the destruction; or 
(2) if the fair market value of the property cannot be ascertained, the cost of replacing the 
property within a reasonable time after the destruction. 
(b) The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter, if the property is damaged, is the cost of 
repairing or restoring the damaged property within a reasonable time after the damage 
occurred. 
28.06 Amount of Pecuniary Loss
 (c)  The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter for documents, 
other than those having a readily ascertainable market value, is:
 (1)  the amount due and collectible at maturity less any part that has 
been satisfied, if the document constitutes evidence of a debt;  or
 (2)  the greatest amount of economic loss that the owner might 
reasonably suffer by virtue of the destruction or damage if the 
document is other than evidence of a debt.
 28.06 Amount of Pecuniary Loss
 (d)  If the amount of pecuniary loss cannot be ascertained by the criteria 
set forth in Subsections (a) through (c), the amount of loss is deemed to 
be greater than $750 but less than $2,500.
 (e)  If the actor proves by a preponderance of the evidence that he gave 
consideration for or had a legal interest in the property involved, the 
value of the interest so proven shall be deducted from:
 (1)  the amount of pecuniary loss if the property is destroyed;  or
 (2)  the amount of pecuniary loss to the extent of an amount equal to 
the ratio the value of the interest bears to the total value of the 
property, if the property is damaged.
 Basic Value LOSS Ladder Chart
 Offense Level
 Class C
 Class B
 Class A
 State Jail Felony
 3rd Degree Felony
 2nd Degree Felony
 1st Degree Felony
 Value of  Loss
 $0.00 > $100
 $100 < $750
 $750 < $2500
 $2500 < $30,000   
$30,000 < $150,000
 $150,000 < $300,000
 $300,000 or more
 Sec. 28.03.  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) Without the effective consent of an owner:
 (1) intentionally or knowingly damages or 
destroys the tangible property of the owner;
 (2) intentionally/knowingly tampers with 
tangible property, causing $ loss or substantial 
inconvenience to the owner/3rd person;  
(3) Or intentionally or knowingly makes 
markings, including inscriptions, slogans, 
drawings, or paintings, on tangible property
 * Offense levels follow the theft ladder unless 
it is a SPECIAL ITEM or SITUATION (see 
following slides)
 Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 (k) (1-2) do not apply if the 
property was a head of cattle, 
bison, or horse killed when in: 
(1) actual official discharge of 
duties of the United States armed 
or State military forces or
 (2)  regular agricultural labor 
duties and practices.
 Criminal Mischief Offense Level’s Chart
 Level
 Class C 
Class C
 Class B
 Class B
 Class A
 Class A
 State Jail 
Felony
 SJF
 Value
 $0 to $100
 $100 to $750
 $750 to $2500
 $2500 to 
$30,000
 < $2500
 < $30,000
 Special item or situation
 or causes a substantial inconvenience
 Or whole/part impairment (installation/removal), 
interruption, or diversion of any public water supply
 a public or private school, higher education institution; 
place of worship; human burial; public monument; or 
community center that provides medical, social, or 
educational programs; & the loss is $750 to $30,000
 habitation damaged by a firearm or explosive weapon
 fence containing cattle, bison, horses, sheep, swine, 
goats, exotic livestock or poultry, or game animals
 whole/part impairment (installation/removal), diversion, or 
interruption of flood control property; or public gas supply, 
communications, transportation, or other service; or
 motor vehicle damaged, destroyed, or tampered with during a 
removal or attempted one of a catalytic converter from it
 (c) The amount of pecuniary loss under this chapter for documents, other than those having a 
readily ascertainable market value, is: 
(1) the amount due and collectible at maturity less any part that has been satisfied, if the 
document constitutes evidence of a debt; or 
(2) the greatest amount of economic loss that the owner might reasonably suffer by virtue of 
the destruction or damage if the document is other than evidence of a debt. 
(d) If the amount of pecuniary loss cannot be ascertained by the criteria set forth in 
Subsections (a) through (c), the amount of loss is deemed to be greater than $750 but less 
than $2,500. 
(e) If the actor proves by a preponderance of the evidence that he gave consideration for or 
had a legal interest in the property involved, the value of the interest so proven shall be 
deducted from: 
(1) the amount of pecuniary loss if the property is destroyed; or 
(2) the amount of pecuniary loss to the extent of an amount equal to the ratio the value of the 
interest bears to the total value of the property, if the property is damaged. 
28.03.  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.   
(a)  A person commits an offense if, without the effective consent of the owner: (1)  he 
intentionally or knowingly damages or destroys the tangible property of the owner; (2)  he 
intentionally or knowingly tampers with the tangible property of the owner and causes 
pecuniary loss or substantial inconvenience to the owner or a third person;  or (3)  he 
intentionally or knowingly makes markings, including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or 
paintings, on the tangible property of the owner. 
(k)  Subsection (a)(1) or (2) does not apply if the tangible personal property of the owner was 
a head of cattle or bison killed, or a horse killed, in the course of the actor’s: (1)  actual 
discharge of official duties as a member of the United States armed forces or the state military 
forces as defined by Section 437.001, Government Code; or (2)  regular agricultural labor 
duties and practices. 
(14) "Texas military forces" means the Texas National Guard, the Texas State Guard, and any 
other military force organized under state law 
* Offense levels follow the value ladder unless it is a SPECIAL ITEM (noted in the charts and 
below) 
(b)  Except as provided by Subsections (f) and (h), an offense under this section is: 
(1)  a Class C misdemeanor if: (A)  the amount of pecuniary loss is less than $100; or (B)  
except as provided in Subdivision (3)(A) or (3)(B), it causes substantial inconvenience to 
others; 
(2)  a Class B misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is $100 or more but less 
than $750; 
(3)  a Class A misdemeanor if: (A)  the amount of pecuniary loss is  $750 or more but 
less than $2,500; or (B)  the actor causes in whole or in part impairment or interruption 
of any public water supply, or causes to be diverted in whole, in part, or in any manner, 
Criminal Mischief Offense Level’s Chart
 Level
 3rd Degree 
Felony
 3°F
 2nd
 2°F
 Degree 
Felony
 1st Degree 
Felony
 Value
 $30,000 to 
$150,000
 $150,000 to 
$300,000
 Special item or situation
 discharge a firearm, other weapon or by any other 
meanscauses death of 1 or more cattle/bison/horses
 • Whole/part impairment, interruption, or diversion 
of property/device used for public power supply or 
transportation communications; or
 • Whole/partly impairment or interruption 
of access to an automated teller
 $300,000 or 
more
 1°F
 • Mad Cow Disease
 28.03 Criminal Mischief Continued 
(c)  It shall be presumed that a person who is receiving the economic benefit of 
public communications, water, gas, or power supply, has knowingly tampered 
with the tangible property if the communication or supply has been:
 (1)  diverted from passing through a metering device;  or
 (2)  prevented from being correctly registered by a metering device;  or
 (3)  activated by any device installed to obtain public communications, 
public water, gas, or power supply without a metering device.
 including installation or removal of any device for any such purpose, any public water 
supply, regardless of the amount of the pecuniary loss; 
(4)  a state jail felony if the amount of pecuniary loss is: (A)  $2,500 or more but less than 
$30,000; (B)  less than $2,500, if the property damaged  or destroyed is a habitation and if 
the damage or destruction is caused by a firearm or explosive weapon; (C)  less than $2,500, 
if the property was a fence used for the production or containment of:  
(i)  cattle, bison, horses, sheep, swine, goats, exotic livestock, or exotic 
poultry; or 
(ii)  game animals as that term is defined by Section 63.001, Parks and 
Wildlife Code; or 
(D)  less than $30,000 and the actor (i)  causes wholly or partly impairment 
or interruption of property used for flood control purposes or a dam or 
of public communications, public transportation, public gas or power supply, 
or other public service; or (ii)  causes to be diverted wholly, partly, or 
in any manner, including installation or removal of any device for any 
such purpose, any public communications or public gas or power supply; or  
(E) less than $30,000, if the property is a motor vehicle that is damaged, destroyed, or 
tampered with during the removal or attempted removal of a catalytic converter from the 
motor vehicle; 
(5) a felony of the third degree if: (A) the amount of the pecuniary loss is $30,000 or more but 
less than $150,000; (B) the actor, by discharging a firearm or other weapon or by any other 
means, causes the death of one or more head of cattle or bison or one or more horses; (C) the 
actor causes wholly or partly impairment or interruption of access to an automated teller 
machine, regardless of the amount of the pecuniary loss; or (D) the amount of pecuniary loss 
is less than $150,000 and the actor: (i) causes wholly or partly impairment or interruption of 
property used for public power supply; or (ii) causes to be diverted wholly, partly, or in any 
manner, including installation or removal of any device for any such purpose, any public 
power supply; 
(6) a felony of the second degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $150,000 or more but less 
than $300,000; or 
(7) a felony of the first degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $300,000 or more. 
(i) Notwithstanding Subsection (b), an offense under this section is a felony of the first degree 
if the property is livestock and the damage is caused by introducing bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy, commonly known as mad cow disease, or a disease listed in rules adopted by 
the Texas Animal Health Commission under Section 161.041(a), Agriculture Code. In this 
subsection, "livestock" has the meaning assigned by Section 161.001, Agriculture Code. 
(j) Notwithstanding Subsection (b), an offense under this section is a felony of the third degree 
if: (1) the tangible property damaged, destroyed, or tampered with is transportation 
communications equipment or a transportation communications device; and (2) the amount 
of the pecuniary loss to the tangible property is less than $150,000. 
(c) For the purposes of this section, it shall be presumed that a person who is receiving the 
economic benefit of public communications, public water, gas, or power supply, has 
knowingly tampered with the tangible property of the owner if the communication or supply 
has been: 
(1) diverted from passing through a metering device; or 
(2) prevented from being correctly registered by a metering device; or 
(3) activated by any device installed to obtain public communications, public water, gas, or 
power supply without a metering device. 
28.03 Criminal Mischief Continued
 (e) When more than one item of tangible property, belonging to one or 
more owners, is damaged, destroyed, or tampered with, pursuant to one 
scheme or continuing course of conduct: 
• conduct may be considered as one offense & amounts of pecuniary 
loss may be aggregated in determining the grade of the offense.
 28.08 Graffiti
 (e)  In this section:
 (1)  "Aerosol paint" means an aerosolized paint product.
 (2)  "Etching or engraving device" means a device that makes a 
delineation or impression on tangible property, regardless of the 
manufacturer's intended use for that device.
 (3)  "Indelible marker" means a device that makes a mark with a paint 
or ink product that is specifically formulated to be more difficult to 
erase, wash out, or remove than ordinary paint or ink products.
 (5)  "School" means a private or public elementary or secondary 
school.
 Sec. 28.08.  GRAFFITI. 
Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) without the effective consent of the owner, 
intentionally or knowingly makes markings, 
including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or 
paintings, on the tangible property with:
 (1)  paint;
 (2)  an indelible marker; or
 (3)  an etching or engraving device.
 Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 Graffiti Offense Level’s Chart
 Level
 Class C
 Class B
 Class A
 State Jail 
Felony
 SJF
 Value
 $0 to $100
 $100 to 
$750
 $750 to 
$2500
 $2500 to 
$30,000
 Special item or situation
 Class C 
Class B
 Class A
 $750 - $30,000 AND is a public/private school, 
higher education institution; place of worship; 
human burial; public monument; or community 
center that provides medical, social, or 
educational programs
 (e) When more than one item of tangible property, belonging to one or more owners, is 
damaged, destroyed, or tampered with in violation of this section pursuant to one scheme or 
continuing course of conduct, the conduct may be considered as one offense, and the 
amounts of pecuniary loss to property resulting from the damage to, destruction of, or 
tampering with the property may be aggregated in determining the grade of the offense. 
(e) In this section: 
(1) "Aerosol paint" means an aerosolized paint product. 
(2) "Etching or engraving device" means a device that makes a delineation or impression on 
tangible property, regardless of the manufacturer's intended use for that device. 
(3) "Indelible marker" means a device that makes a mark with a paint or ink product that is 
specifically formulated to be more difficult to erase, wash out, or remove than ordinary paint 
or ink products. 
(4) "Institution of higher education" has the meaning assigned by Section 481.134, Health and 
Safety Code. 
(5) "School" means a private or public elementary or secondary school. 
Sec. 28.08.  GRAFFITI.   
(a)  A person commits an offense if, without the effective consent of the owner, the person 
intentionally or knowingly makes markings, including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or 
paintings, on the tangible property of the owner with: 
(1)  paint; 
(2)  an indelible marker; or 
(3)  an etching or engraving device. 
(b)  Except as provided by Subsection (d), an offense under this section is: 
(1) a Class C misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is less than $100; 
(2)  a Class B misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is $100 or more but less 
than $750; 
(3)  a Class A misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is $750 or more but less 
than $2,500; 
(4)  a state jail felony if the amount of pecuniary loss is $2,500 or more but less than 
$30,000; 
(d)  An offense under this section is a state jail felony if: 
(1)  the marking is made on a school, an institution of higher education, a place of 
worship or human burial, a public monument, or a community center that provides 
medical, social, or educational programs;  and 
(2)  the amount of the pecuniary loss to real property or to tangible personal property 
is $750 or more but less than $30,000. 
Graffiti Offense Level’s Chart
 Level
 Value
 3rd Degree Felony $30,000 to 
$150,000
 2nd Degree Felony $150,000 to 
$300,000
 1st Degree Felony $300,000 or 
more
 Special item or situation
 3°F
 2°F
 1°F
 28.08 Graffiti Continued
 (c)  When more than one item of tangible property, belonging to one or 
more owners, is marked in violation pursuant to one scheme or 
continuing course of conduct, the conduct may be considered as one 
offense, and the amounts of pecuniary loss may be aggregated in 
determining the grade of the offense.
 28.04.  RECKLESS DAMAGE OR 
DESTRUCTION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 a) without the effective consent of the 
owner, he recklessly damages or destroys 
property of the owner.
 Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 Class C 
Sec. 28.07.  INTERFERENCE WITH 
RAILROAD PROPERTY
 (a) (1)  "Railroad property" means:
 (A)  a train, locomotive, railroad car, caboose, work equipment, 
rolling stock, safety device, switch, or connection that is owned, 
leased, operated, or possessed by a railroad;  or
 (B)  a railroad track, rail, bridge, trestle, or right-of-way owned or 
used by a railroad.
 (2)  "Tamper" means to move, alter, or interfere with 
railroad property.
 Sec. 28.07.  INTERFERENCE WITH 
RAILROAD PROPERTY (b)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (1) throws an object or discharges a firearm or 
weapon at a train or rail-mounted work 
equipment; or
 c) Class B Misd
 (2) without the effective consent of the owner:
 (A)  enters or remains on railroad property, 
knowing that it is railroad property; (Video)
 (B)  tampers with railroad property;
 (C) places an obstruction on a railroad track or 
right-of-way;  or
 (D) cause in any way the derailment of a train, rail 
car, or other rail property that moves on tracks.
 Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 F3  if causes bodily injury
 d) Class 
C Misd
 (f) no offense if entry is an   
employee or labor rep, 
allowed by the Railway Labor 
Act (45 U.S.C. 151).
 These follow 
theft ladder
 (b)  Except as provided by Subsection (d), an offense under this section is: 
(5)  a felony of the third degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $30,000 or more but 
less than $150,000; 
(6)  a felony of the second degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $150,000 or more 
but less than $300,000;  or 
(7)  a felony of the first degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $300,000 or more. 
c) When more than one item of tangible property, belonging to one or more owners, is 
marked in violation of this section pursuant to one scheme or continuing course of conduct, 
the conduct may be considered as one offense, and the amounts of pecuniary loss to property 
resulting from the marking of the property may be aggregated in determining the grade of the 
offense. 
Sec. 28.04.  RECKLESS DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION.   
(a)  A person commits an offense if, without the effective consent of the owner, he recklessly 
damages or destroys property of the owner. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor 
28.07. INTERFERENCE WITH RAILROAD PROPERTY. (a) In this section: (1) "Railroad property" 
means: 
(A) a train, locomotive, railroad car, caboose, work equipment, rolling stock, safety device, 
switch, or connection that is owned, leased, operated, or possessed by a railroad; or 
(B) a railroad track, rail, bridge, trestle, or right-of-way owned or used by a railroad. 
(2) "Tamper" means to move, alter, or interfere with railroad property. 
28.07.  INTERFERENCE WITH RAILROAD PROPERTY (b)  A person commits an offense if the 
person: 
(1)  throws an object or discharges a firearm or weapon at a train or rail-mounted 
work equipment;  or  
(2)  without the effective consent of the owner: 
(A)  enters or remains on railroad property, knowing that it is railroad property; 
(Video) 
(B)  tampers with railroad property; 
(C)  places an obstruction on a railroad track or right-of-way;  or 
(D)  causes in any manner the derailment of a train, railroad car, or other railroad 
property that moves on tracks. 
(c)  An offense under Subsection (b)(1) is a Class B misdemeanor unless the person causes 
bodily injury to another, in which event the offense is a felony of the third degree. 
(d)  An offense under Subsection (b)(2)(A) is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(e)  An offense under Subsection (b)(2)(B), (b)(2)(C), or (b)(2)(D) is a Class C misdemeanor 
unless the person causes pecuniary loss of $100 or more, in which event the offense is: 
(1)  a Class B misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is $100 or more but less 
than $750; 
(2)  a Class A misdemeanor if the amount of pecuniary loss is $750 or more but less 
than $2,500; 
(3)  a state jail felony if the amount of pecuniary loss is $2,500 or more but less than 
$30,000;  
(4)  a felony of the third degree if the amount of the pecuniary loss is $30,000 or more 
but less than $150,000; 
(5)  a felony of the second degree if the amount of pecuniary loss is $150,000 or more 
but less than $300,000;  or 
(6)  a felony of the first degree if the amount of the pecuniary loss is $300,000 or more. 
(f)  The conduct described in Subsection (b)(2)(A) is not an offense under this section if it is 
undertaken by an employee of the railroad or by a representative of a labor organization 
which represents or is seeking to represent the employees of the railroad as long as the 
employee or representative has a right to engage in such conduct under the Railway Labor Act 
(45 U.S.C. Section 151 et seq.). 
Sec. 28.01. Definitions
 (1)  "Habitation" means a structure or vehicle that is adapted for the 
overnight accommodation of persons and includes:
 (A) each separately secured or occupied portion of the structure or 
vehicle; and
 (B) each structure appurtenant to or connected with the structure or 
vehicle.
 (2)  "Building" means any structure or enclosure intended for use or 
occupation as a habitation or for some purpose of trade, manufacture, 
ornament, or use.
 (4)  "Vehicle" includes any device in, on, or by which any person or 
property is or may be propelled, moved, or drawn in the normal course 
of commerce or transportation.
 Sec. 28.01. Definitions
 (5) "Open-space land" means real property that is 
undeveloped for the purpose of human habitation.
 (6)  "Controlled burning" means the burning of unwanted 
vegetation with the consent of the owner of the property 
on which the vegetation is located and in such a manner 
that the fire is controlled and limited to a designated area.  
Sec. 28.02.  ARSON (a)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) starts a fire, regardless, if it continues, or an 
explosion with intent to destroy or damage:
 (1) any vegetation, fence, or structure on 
open-space land; or
 (2) any building/habitation/vehicle & knows:   
Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 (b) Exception to (a)(1) a controlled 
burning of open-space land.
 (c) Defense to (a)(2)(A) if the actor 
obtained a permit or other written 
authorization prior to starting it, 
(A) it is in an incorporated city/town;
 (B) it’s insured for damage/destruction;
 (C) it’s under mortgage/other secur. interest;
 (D) it is on another’s property;  
(E) within it is another’s property; or
 (F) is RECKLESS the burning/explosion 
will endanger someone’s life or property
 d) 2°F unless it is shown at trial that
 1°F there is BI or death or the 
intended target was a 
habitation or place of assembly 
or worship.
 8.01. DEFINITIONS. In this chapter:  
(1) "Habitation" means a structure or vehicle that is adapted for the overnight 
accommodation of persons and includes: (A) each separately secured or occupied portion of 
the structure or vehicle; and (B) each structure appurtenant to or connected with the 
structure or vehicle. 
(2) "Building" means any structure or enclosure intended for use or occupation as a habitation 
or for some purpose of trade, manufacture, ornament, or use. 
(4) "Vehicle" includes any device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may be 
propelled, moved, or drawn in the normal course of commerce or transportation. 
(5) "Open-space land" means real property that is undeveloped for the purpose of human 
habitation. 
(6) "Controlled burning" means the burning of unwanted vegetation with the consent of the 
owner of the property on which the vegetation is located and in such a manner that the fire is 
controlled and limited to a designated area. 
28.02.  ARSON.   
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person starts a fire, regardless of whether the fire 
continues after ignition, or causes an explosion with intent to destroy or damage: (1) any 
vegetation, fence, or structure on open-space land; or (2)  any building, habitation, or vehicle: 
(A)  knowing that it is within the limits of an incorporated city or town; 
(B)  knowing that it is insured against damage or destruction; 
(C)  knowing that it is subject to a mortgage or other security interest; 
(D)  knowing that it is located on property belonging to another; 
(E)  knowing that it has located within it property belonging to another;  or 
(F)  when the person is reckless about whether the burning or explosion will endanger the 
life of some individual or the safety of the property of another. 
That was Arson (a)
 there are other subsections
 Sec. 28.02.  ARSON
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a-1) if recklessly starts a fire or causes an 
explosion while manufacturing or attempting 
a controlled substance & it damages any 
building, habitation, or vehicle.
 (a-2) if the person intentionally starts a fire or 
causes an explosion and:
 (1) recklessly damages or destroys a building 
belonging to another; or
 (2) recklessly causes another person to suffer 
bodily injury or death.
 Defenses, Definitions, & 
Enhancements
 e) SJF unless at trial it’s shown that
 3°F BI or death was suffered
 f) SJF
 (g) If conduct violates (a-1) or (a-2) & 
another of this section or another PC 
section, the actor may be prosecuted 
under either of the subsections here 
or the other PC subsection 
Arson (a-1)
 SJF +
 Arson (a-2)
 Typical Offenses with Property Damage Chart
 Instrument
 Property
 Culpability
 Intent to destroy / 
damage unlawfully
 Arson
 Vegetation, fence, 
struct on open-land or
 building, habitation, or 
vehicle
 these
 Reckless when endanger 
life or property safety 
Reckless making of 
controlled substances
 Intentionally starts & 
then reckless
 damages any building, 
habitation, or vehicle 
dmg/dest building or
 causes B/I or death
 Fire / 
Explosion
 Enhancements
 Habitation or 
Worship Places
 bodily injury or 
death occurs
 (b) It is an exception to the application of Subsection (a)(1) that the fire or explosion was a 
part of the controlled burning of open-space land. 
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(2)(A) that prior to starting the fire or 
causing the explosion, the actor obtained a permit or other written authorization granted in 
accordance with a city ordinance, if any, regulating fires and explosions. 
(d) An offense under Subsection (a) is a felony of the second degree, except that the offense is 
a felony of the first degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that: (1) bodily injury or 
death was suffered by any person by reason of the commission of the offense; or (2) the 
property intended to be damaged or destroyed by the actor was a habitation or a place of 
assembly or worship. 
28.02.  ARSON.   
(a-1)  A person commits an offense if the person recklessly starts a fire or causes an explosion 
while manufacturing or attempting to manufacture a controlled substance and the fire or 
explosion damages any building, habitation, or vehicle. 
(a-2)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally starts a fire or causes an 
explosion and in so doing: 
(1)  recklessly damages or destroys a building belonging to another; or (2)  recklessly 
causes another person to suffer bodily injury or death. 
(e) An offense under Subsection (a-1) is a state jail felony, except that the offense is a felony 
of the third degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that bodily injury or death was 
suffered by any person by reason of the commission of the offense. 
(f) An offense under Subsection (a-2) is a state jail felony. 
Typical Offenses with Property Damage Chart
 Culpability Property Instrument Enhancements
 Arson
 Intent to destroy / 
damage unlawfully
 these
 Reckless when endanger 
life or property safety 
Veg-tion, fence, struct 
on open-land or 
building, habitation, or 
vehicle Fire / 
Explosion
 Habitation or 
Worship Places
 bodily injury or 
death occurs
 Reckless making of 
controlled substances
 damages any building, 
habitation, or vehicle 
Intentionally starts & 
then reckless
 dmg/destbuilding or
 causes B/I or death
 Criminal 
Mischief
 intentionally and 
knowingly
 any property w/o 
consent
 damage/destroy, 
tampers w/ $ loss 
or substantial 
inconvenience , 
or makes 
markings 
Livestock/game animals 
fencing, habit. with 
firearm/explosive, pub 
utilities. If $750 at 
worship, burial; center 
w/ medical, social, or 
educ. progs; or pub 
monuments, & schools
 Reckless 
Damage reckless any property w/o 
consent
 Damages / 
destroys Class C only
 Graffiti intentionally and 
knowingly
 any property w/o 
consent
 Marking: paint, 
marker, or 
etching/engraving
 $750 & worship, burial; 
center w/ social 
medical, or educ progs; 
pub monument; schools
 
 
Select your team below
 A.Group A
 B. Group B
 C.Group C
 D.Group D
 E. Group E
 F. Group F
 
 
High Schoolers Jared and Aaron go to the rival high school and use chalk to mark-up the 
outer walls of the school with insulting slogans and lewd drawings, which will cost about 
$300 to clean up. (1)
 A. Criminal Mischief C
 B. Criminal Mischief B
 C. Criminal Mischief A
 D. Criminal Mischief Felony
 E. Graffiti C
 F. Graffiti B
 G. Graffiti A
 H. Graffiti Felony
 I. Reckless Damage
 J. Arson
 The Rivals Rivalry
 
 
Afterwards Jared and Aaron split up to go home.  On Aaron’s way home, he throws a 
match inside a dumpster which catches the trash inside on fire.  The fire department 
responds to put out the fire.  The cost to the city in manpower is $1,300. (2)
 A. Criminal Mischief C
 B. Criminal Mischief B
 C. Criminal Mischief A
 D. Criminal Mischief Felony
 E. Graffiti C
 F. Graffiti B
 G. Graffiti A
 H. Graffiti Felony
 I. Reckless Damage
 J. Arson
 The Rivals Rivalry
 
 
After getting drunk at home, Aaron goes back out and spray paints more slogans on the 
school’s walls, which causes $500 in damage. Afterwards, he stops by the local cemetery 
and uses a permanent marker to write profanity on the tombstones of one of his former 
teachers, which causes $250 in damage. (3)
 A. Criminal Mischief C
 B. Criminal Mischief B
 C. Criminal Mischief A
 D. Criminal Mischief Felony
 E. Graffiti C
 F. Graffiti B
 G. Graffiti A
 H. Graffiti Felony
 I. Reckless Damage
 J. Arson
 The Rivals Rivalry
 
 
Aaron then toilet papers and throws eggs at 9 houses in his neighborhood area (clean-up 
will be $50 per location). (4)
 A. Criminal Mischief C
 B. Criminal Mischief B
 C. Criminal Mischief A
 D. Criminal Mischief Felony
 E. Graffiti C
 F. Graffiti B
 G. Graffiti A
 H. Graffiti Felony
 I. Reckless Damage
 J. Arson
 The Rivals Rivalry
 
 
The Rivals Rivalry
 On his way home, Aaron spray paints City Hall with various slogans and obscenities.  
This results in $500 of damage to the location. (5)
 I.
 J.
 A. Criminal Mischief C
 B. Criminal Mischief B
 C. Criminal Mischief A
 D. Criminal Mischief Felony
 E. Graffiti C
 F. Graffiti B
 G. Graffiti A
 H. Graffiti Felony
 Reckless Damage
 Arson
 Participant Leaders
 Points
 Participant
 Points
 Participant
 Team Scores
 Points
 Team
 Points
 Team
 42.09. CRUELTY TO 
LIVESTOCK ANIMALS: Definitions
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) In this section:
 (1) Abandon = abandoning the animal in the person's 
custody without making reasonable arrangements for 
assumption of custody by another person.
 (2) "Cruel manner" a manner that causes or permits 
unjustified or unwarranted pain or suffering.
 (7) Torture: any act causing unjustifiable pain/suffering.
 (3) "Custody" = responsibility for the health, safety, and 
welfare of the animal subject to the person's care and 
control, regardless of ownership of the livestock animal.
 (4) "Depredation" = loss of/damage to agricultural crops, 
livestock, poultry, wildlife, or personal property.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (5) "Livestock animal" means:
 (A) cattle, sheep, swine, goats, ratites, or 
poultry commonly raised for consumption;
 (B) a horse, pony, mule, donkey, or hinny;
 (C) native or nonnative hoofstock raised 
under agriculture practices; or
 (D) native or nonnative fowl commonly 
raised under agricultural practices.
 (6) Necessary food, water, or care: food, 
water, or care required to maintain the 
livestock animal in a state of good health.
 (8) "Trip" means to use an object to cause a 
horse to fall or lose its balance.
 42.09. CRUELTY TO LIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) (1) SJF  
(a)intentionally or knowingly:
 (1) tortures a livestock animal;
 (2) fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, 
water, or care for the animal in their custody;
 (3) abandons unreasonably a livestock animal in 
the person's custody;
 (4) transports or confines a livestock animal in a 
cruel and unusual manner;
 (a)(1) 3°F w/2 convicts 
(a) (2,3,4) Class A except
 (a) (2,3,4) SJF w/2 prior convictions
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (e) Defense = engaged in bona fide 
scientific research experimentation
 (f) exception: (1) generally accepted & 
lawful form of:
 (A) fishing, hunting, or trapping; or
 (B) wildlife management, depredation 
control, or shooting preserve 
practices, regulated by law; or
 (2) animal husbandry or agriculture 
practice
 (g) No civil cause of action for 
damages/enforcement of this section.
 Torture: ant act causing unjustifiable 
pain or suffering
 42.09. CRUELTY TO LIVESTOCK ANIMALS.(b) (1) "Abandon" includes abandoning a livestock 
animal in the person's custody without making reasonable arrangements for assumption of 
custody by another person. 
(2) "Cruel manner" includes a manner that causes or permits unjustified or unwarranted pain 
or suffering. 
(3) "Custody" includes responsibility for the health, safety, and welfare of a livestock animal 
subject to the person's care and control, regardless of ownership of the livestock animal. 
(4) "Depredation" has the meaning assigned by Section 71.001, Parks and Wildlife Code. 
(5) "Livestock animal" means: (A) cattle, sheep, swine, goats, ratites, or poultry commonly 
raised for human consumption; (B) a horse, pony, mule, donkey, or hinny; (C) native or 
nonnative hoofstock raised under agriculture practices; or (D) native or nonnative fowl 
commonly raised under agricultural practices. 
(6) "Necessary food, water, or care" includes food, water, or care provided to the extent 
required to maintain the livestock animal in a state of good health. 
(7) "Torture" includes any act that causes unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
(8) "Trip" means to use an object to cause a horse to fall or lose its balance. 
42.09. CRUELTY TO LIVESTOCK ANIMALS. (a) A person commits an offense if the person 
intentionally or knowingly: 
(1) tortures a livestock animal; 
(2) fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, water, or care for a livestock animal in the 
person's custody; 
(3) abandons unreasonably a livestock animal in the person's custody; 
(4) transports or confines a livestock animal in a cruel and unusual manner; 
(c) An offense under Subsection (a)(2), (3), (4), or (9) is a Class A misdemeanor, except that the 
offense is a state jail felony if the person has previously been convicted two times under this 
section, two times under Section 42.092, or one time under this section and one time under 
Section 42.092. An offense under Subsection (a)(1), (5), (6), (7), or (8) is a state jail felony, 
except that the offense is a felony of the third degree if the person has previously been 
convicted two times under this section, two times under Section 42.092, or one time under 
this section and one time under Section 42.092.e) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense 
under this section that the actor was engaged in bona fide experimentation for scientific 
research. 
(f) It is an exception to the application of this section that the conduct engaged in by the actor 
is a generally accepted and otherwise lawful: 
(1) form of conduct occurring solely for the purpose of or in support of: (A) fishing, hunting, or 
trapping; or (B) wildlife management, wildlife or depredation control, or shooting preserve 
practices as regulated by state and federal law; or 
(2) animal husbandry or agriculture practice involving livestock animals. 
(g) This section does not create a civil cause of action for damages or enforcement of this 
section. 
42.09. CRUELTY TO LIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (5) administers poison to a livestock animal, other 
than cattle, horses, sheep, swine, or goats, 
belonging to another without legal authority or the 
owner's effective consent;
 (6) causes one livestock animal to fight with 
another livestock animal or with an animal as 
defined by Section 42.092;
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (7) uses a live livestock animal as a lure in dog race 
training or in dog coursing on a racetrack;
 (8) trips a horse; or
 (9) seriously overworks a livestock animal.
 (d) (a)(8) defense= actor tripped the 
horse for the purpose of identifying 
the ownership of the horse or giving 
veterinary care to the horse.
 (a) (5-8) SJF 
(a)(5-8) 3°F w/2 prior convictions 
(a) (9) Class A
 (a) (9) SJF w/ 2 prior convictions
 42.092. CRUELTY TO 
NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Definitions
 (2) "Animal" means a domesticated living creature, including stray or feral cat or dog, 
and a wild living creature previously captured. The term does not include an uncaptured 
wild living creature or a livestock animal.
 (9) Trap-Neuter-Return Program: nonlethal population control practice where an animal 
is, by a Veterinarian: trapped, evaluated, vaccinated, sterilized, marked whether by 
notching or tipping one ear or otherwise; & returned to the trap location.
 (10) "Veterinarian" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 801.002, 
Occupations Code.
 42.09. CRUELTY TO LIVESTOCK ANIMALS. (a) A person commits an offense if the person 
intentionally or knowingly: 
(5) administers poison to a livestock animal, other than cattle, horses, sheep, swine, or goats, 
belonging to another without legal authority or the owner's effective consent; 
(6) causes one livestock animal to fight with another livestock animal or with an animal as 
defined by Section 42.092; 
(7) uses a live livestock animal as a lure in dog race training or in dog coursing on a racetrack; 
(8) trips a horse; or 
(9) seriously overworks a livestock animal. 
(c) An offense under (9) is a Class A misdemeanor, except that the offense is a state jail felony 
if the person has previously been convicted two times under this section, two times under 
Section 42.092, or one time under this section and one time under Section 42.092. An offense 
under (5-8) is a state jail felony, except that the offense is a felony of the third degree if the 
person has previously been convicted two times under this section, two times under Section 
42.092, or one time under this section and one time under Section 42.092. 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(8) that the actor tripped the horse for 
the purpose of identifying the ownership of the horse or giving veterinary care to the horse. 
42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS. (a) In this section: 
(2) "Animal" means a domesticated living creature, including any stray or feral cat or dog, and 
a wild living creature previously captured. The term does not include an uncaptured wild living 
creature or a livestock animal. 
(9) "Trap-Neuter-Return Program" means a nonlethal population control practice in which an 
animal is: (A) trapped; (B) evaluated by a veterinarian; (C) if unvaccinated, vaccinated by a 
veterinarian; (D) if unsterilized, sterilized by a veterinarian; (E) marked by a veterinarian, 
whether by notching or tipping one ear or otherwise; and (F) returned to the trap location. 
(10) "Veterinarian" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 801.002, Occupations 
Code. 
42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b)intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly:
 (1) Tortures or cruelly kills or causes SBI to an animal;
 (2) without effective consent, kills, administers poison to, 
or causes SBI to an animal;
 (3) fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, water, 
care, or shelter for an animal in the person's custody;
 (4) abandons an animal unreasonably in the person's 
custody;
 (5) transports or confines an animal in a cruel manner;
 (6) without effective consent, causes bodily injury to an 
animal;
 (9) seriously overworks an animal.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c-1) 3°F for (1
2) except
 (c-1) 2°F for (1-2) w/prior (1,2,7,8) or 
42.09 conviction
 (e) Defense (b)(2) or (6) if the animal was:
 (1) on someone’s property injuring / 
killing their livestock, damaging crops, & 
was killed/injured when discovered; or
 (2) killed/injured within a public servant 
duty or electricity/gas public work efforts
 (c) Class A for (3-6)(9) except
 (c) SJF for w/2 prior convictions here or 42.09 or 
any combo
 (e-1) Defense (b)(4) a stray/feral animal 
(not wild) was released/returned pursuant 
to a Trap-Neuter-Return Program.
 (e-2) Defense for (b)(4) that the actor 
released or returned a previously trapped 
wild living creature in accordance with 
Texas wildlife laws and regulations.
 42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS.  
(b) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(1) tortures an animal or in a cruel manner kills or causes serious bodily injury to an animal; 
(2) without the owner's effective consent, kills, administers poison to, or causes serious bodily 
injury to an animal; 
(3) fails unreasonably to provide necessary food, water, care, or shelter for an animal in the 
person's custody; 
(4) abandons unreasonably an animal in the person's custody; 
(5) transports or confines an animal in a cruel manner; 
(6) without the owner's effective consent, causes bodily injury to an animal; or  
(9) seriously overworks an animal. 
(c) An offense under Subsection (b)(3), (4), (5), (6), or (9) is a Class A misdemeanor, except 
that the offense is a state jail felony if the person has previously been convicted two times 
under this section, two times under Section 42.09, or one time under this section and one 
time under Section 42.09. 
(c-1) An offense under Subsection (b)(1) or (2) is a felony of the third degree, except that the 
offense is a felony of the second degree if the person has previously been convicted under 
Subsection (b)(1), (2), (7), or (8) or under Section 42.09. 
42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b)intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly:
 (7) causes one animal to fight another animal, if 
either is not a dog; or
 (8) uses a live animal as a lure in dog race training 
or in dog coursing on a racetrack; or
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c-2) SJF for (7-8) except
 (c-2) 3°F for prior conviction here or 42.09
 42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS
 Defenses
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (d) defense that:
 (1) reasonable fear of bodily injury to actor/another by a “dangerous wild animal” HSC822.101
 (2) the actor was engaged in bona fide experimentation for scientific research.
 (f) It is an exception to the application of this section that it is a generally accepted and otherwise 
lawful:
 (1) form of conduct occurring solely for the purpose of or in support of: (A) fishing, hunting, or 
trapping; or
 (B) wildlife management, wildlife or depredation control, or shooting preserve practices as 
regulated by state and federal law; or
 (2) animal husbandry or agriculture practice involving livestock animals.
 (g) This section does not create a civil cause of action for damages or enforcement of the section.
 38.151. INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE 
SERVICE ANIMALS (PSA)
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (c)(1) Class C 
(b) recklessly:
 (1) taunts, torments, or strikes a police service animal;
 (2) throws an object or substance at a PSA;
 (3) interferes/obstructs a PSA/Handler/Rider when one:
 (A) inhibits/restricts the handler’s/rider's control; or
 (B) deprives the handler/rider of control of the animal;
 (4) releases a police service animal from its control area 
(5) enters the PSA’s control area without effect consent, 
includes placing food/other object/substance in the area;
 (6) injures or kills a PSA; or
 (7) conduct likely to injure/kill, including administering 
or setting a poison, trap, or any other object/substance.
 (c)(2)Class B
 Definitions & punishment levels
 (a) 
(3) "Police service animal" means a dog, horse, 
or other domesticated animal that is specially
 (2) "Handler or rider" means a peace officer, 
corrections officer/jailer specially trained to use 
a PSA trained for use by a handler or rider.
 (1) "Area of control" includes vehicle/trailer/ 
kennel/pen/yard.
 (c3) Class A for (b) 3-5
 (c4) SJF: injure/conduct likely to
 (c5) 2°F kills/conduct likely to
 (c5) 2°F material & permanent 
injury affecting its police service or 
conduct likely to
 42.092. CRUELTY TO NONLIVESTOCK ANIMALS. (b) A person commits an offense if the person 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly: 
(7) causes one animal to fight with another animal, if either animal is not a dog; or 
(8) uses a live animal as a lure in dog race training or in dog coursing on a racetrack  
(c-2) An offense under Subsection (b)(7) or (8) is a state jail felony, except that the offense is a 
felony of the third degree if the person has previously been convicted under this section or 
under Section 42.09. 
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(2) or (6) that: (1) the animal was 
discovered on the person's property in the act of or after injuring or killing the person's 
livestock animals or damaging the person's crops and that the person killed or injured the 
animal at the time of this discovery; or (2) the person killed or injured the animal within the 
scope of the person's employment as a public servant or in furtherance of activities or 
operations associated with electricity transmission or distribution, electricity generation or 
operations associated with the generation of electricity, or natural gas delivery. 
(e-1) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(4) that the actor released or returned 
a stray or feral animal which is not a wild living creature pursuant to a Trap-Neuter-Return 
Program. 
(e-2) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b)(4) that the actor released or returned 
a previously trapped wild living creature in accordance with Texas wildlife laws and 
regulations. 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: (1) the actor had a reasonable fear of 
bodily injury to the actor or to another person by a dangerous wild animal as defined by 
Section 822.101, Health and Safety Code; or (2) the actor was engaged in bona fide 
experimentation for scientific research. 
(f) It is an exception to the application of this section that the conduct engaged in by the actor 
is a generally accepted and otherwise lawful: (1) form of conduct occurring solely for the 
purpose of or in support of: (A) fishing, hunting, or trapping; or (B) wildlife management, 
wildlife or depredation control, or shooting preserve practices as regulated by state and 
federal law; or (2) animal husbandry or agriculture practice involving livestock animals. 
(g) This section does not create a civil cause of action for damages or enforcement of the 
section. 
38.151. INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE SERVICE ANIMALS  
(a) In this section: (1) "Area of control" includes a vehicle, trailer, kennel, pen, or yard. (2) 
"Handler or rider" means a peace officer, corrections officer, or jailer who is specially trained 
to use a police service animal for law enforcement, corrections, prison or jail security, or 
investigative purposes. (3) "Police service animal" means a dog, horse, or other domesticated 
animal that is specially trained for use by a handler or rider. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person recklessly: 
(1) taunts, torments, or strikes a police service animal; 
(2) throws an object or substance at a police service animal; 
(3) interferes with or obstructs a police service animal or interferes with or obstructs the 
handler or rider of a police service animal in a manner that: (A) inhibits or restricts the 
handler's or rider's control of the animal; or (B) deprives the handler or rider of control of the 
animal; 
(4) releases a police service animal from its area of control; 
(5) enters the area of control of a police service animal without the effective consent of the 
handler or rider, including placing food or any other object or substance into that area; 
(6) injures or kills a police service animal; or 
(7) engages in conduct likely to injure or kill a police service animal, including administering or 
setting a poison, trap, or any other object or substance. 
(c) An offense under this section is: (1) a Class C misdemeanor if the person commits an 
offense under Subsection (b)(1); (2) a Class B misdemeanor if the person commits an offense 
under Subsection (b)(2); (3) a Class A misdemeanor if the person commits an offense under 
Subsection (b)(3), (4), or (5);  
(4) except as provided by Subdivision (5), a state jail felony if the person commits an offense 
under Subsection (b)(6) or (7) by injuring a police service animal or by engaging in conduct 
likely to injure the animal; or  
(5) a felony of the second degree if the person commits an offense under Subsection (b)(6) or 
(7) by: (A) killing a police service animal or engaging in conduct likely to kill the animal; (B) 
injuring a police service animal in a manner that materially and permanently affects the ability 
of the animal to perform as a police service animal; or (C) engaging in conduct likely to injure a 
police service animal in a manner that would materially and permanently affect the ability of 
the animal to perform as a police service animal. 
42.091. ATTACK ON ASSISTANCE ANIMAL
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly attacks, 
injures, or kills an assistance animal or
 (b) incites/permits an animal, owned by/in one’s 
custody, to attack, injure, or kill an assistance 
animal and
 as a result of the person's conduct, the assistance 
animal is attacked, injured, or killed.
 Class A if attacks
 SJF if injures
 3°F  if kills
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 d) Court shall order a convict under (a) to 
make restitution to the owner for:
 (1) related veterinary or medical bills;
 (2) the cost of:
 (A) replacing the assistance animal; or
 (B) retraining an injured assistance animal 
by a generally recognized, reputable, & 
competent organization to provide the 
special equipment/training; and
 (3) any other expense reasonably incurred 
related to the offense.
 (1) Assistance animal (121.002, Human Resources Code) 
K-9 specially trained/equipped to help a person with a 
disability and is used by a person with a disability.
 42.10. DOG FIGHTING
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) intentionally or knowingly:(1) causes a dog to fight 
with another dog;
 (2) participates in the earnings/operates a facility used for 
dog fighting;
 (3) uses or permits another to use any real estate, 
building, room, tent, arena, or other property for dog 
fighting;
 (4) owns or possesses dog-fighting equipment w/intent 
the equipment be used to train a dog for fighting or in 
furtherance of dog fighting;
 (5) owns or trains a dog w/intent it be used in an 
exhibition of dog fighting; or
 (6) attends as a spectator an exhibition of dog fighting.
 (b)(1) "Dog fighting“ any situation in which one dog 
attacks or fights with another dog.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) A conviction under Subsection (a)(2) or 
(3) may be had upon the uncorroborated 
testimony of a party to the offense.
 (a)(1-3)SJF 
(a)(4-6)  Class A 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under 
(a)(1) that the actor caused a dog to fight 
with another dog to protect livestock, other 
property, or a person from the other dog, 
and for no other purpose.
 (b)(2) "Dog-fighting equipment" per CCP 
18.18(g).
 42.091. ATTACK ON ASSISTANCE ANIMAL. (a) A person commits an offense if the person 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly attacks, injures, or kills an assistance animal. 
(b) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly incites or 
permits an animal owned by or otherwise in the custody of the actor to attack, injure, or kill 
an assistance animal and, as a result of the person's conduct, the assistance animal is 
attacked, injured, or killed. 
(c) An offense under this section is a: (1) Class A misdemeanor if the actor or an animal owned 
by or otherwise in the custody of the actor attacks an assistance animal; (2) state jail felony if 
the actor or an animal owned by or otherwise in the custody of the actor injures an assistance 
animal; or (3) felony of the third degree if the actor or an animal owned by or otherwise in the 
custody of the actor kills an assistance animal. 
(d) A court shall order a defendant convicted of an offense under Subsection (a) to make 
restitution to the owner of the assistance animal for: 
(1) related veterinary or medical bills;  
(2) the cost of: (A) replacing the assistance animal; or (B) retraining an injured assistance 
animal by an organization generally recognized by agencies involved in the rehabilitation of 
persons with disabilities as reputable and competent to provide special equipment for or 
special training to an animal to help a person with a disability; and 
(3) any other expense reasonably incurred as a result of the offense. 
(e) In this section: (1) "Assistance animal" has the meaning assigned by Section 121.002, 
Human Resources Code. (2) "Custody" has the meaning assigned by Section 42.09. 
42.10. DOG FIGHTING. (a) A person commits an offense if the person intentionally or 
knowingly: 
(1) causes a dog to fight with another dog; 
(2) participates in the earnings of or operates a facility used for dog fighting; 
(3) uses or permits another to use any real estate, building, room, tent, arena, or other 
property for dog fighting; 
(4) owns or possesses dog-fighting equipment with the intent that the equipment be used to 
train a dog for dog fighting or in furtherance of dog fighting; 
(5) owns or trains a dog with the intent that the dog be used in an exhibition of dog fighting; 
or 
(6) attends as a spectator an exhibition of dog fighting. 
(b) In this section: (1) "Dog fighting" means any situation in which one dog attacks or fights 
with another dog. (2) "Dog-fighting equipment" has the meaning assigned by Article 18.18(g), 
Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(c) A conviction under Subsection (a)(2) or (3) may be had upon the uncorroborated testimony 
of a party to the offense. 
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) that the actor caused a dog to fight 
with another dog to protect livestock, other property, or a person from the other dog, and for 
no other purpose. 
(e) An offense under Subsection (a)(4), (5), or (6) is a Class A misdemeanor. An offense under 
Subsection (a)(1), (2), or (3) is a state jail felony. 
42.105. COCKFIGHTING
 Definitions
 Terms:
 (1) "Bridle" means a leather device designed to fit over the head and beak of a cock to 
prevent the cock from injuring another cock.
 (2) "Cock" means the male of any type of domestic fowl.
 (3) "Cockfighting" any situation in which one cock attacks or fights with another cock.
 (4) "Gaff" means an artificial steel spur designed to attach to the leg of a cock to replace or 
supplement the cock's natural spur.
 (5) "Slasher" means a steel weapon resembling a curved knife blade designed to attach to 
the foot of a cock.
 42.105. COCKFIGHTING
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b)(1-2)SJF 
(b) knowingly:
 (1) causes a cock to fight with another cock;
 (2) participates in the earnings of a cockfight;
 (3) uses or permits another to use any real estate, 
building, room, tent, arena, or other property for 
cockfighting;
 (4) owns or trains a cock with the intent that the 
cock be used in an exhibition of cockfighting;
 (5) manufactures, buys, sells, barters, exchanges, 
possesses, advertises, or otherwise offers a gaff, 
slasher, or other sharp implement designed for 
attachment to a cock with the intent that the 
implement be used in cockfighting; or
 (6) attends as a spectator an exhibition of 
cockfighting.
 (b)(3-5)  Class A 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) affirmative defense (1) occurred solely for 
the purpose/support of breeding for poultry 
shows when judged by its appearance; or
 (2) was incidental to collecting bridles, gaffs, 
or slashers.
 (d) affirmative defense not available under (c) 
if evidence shows the actor is also engaging in 
use of the cocks for cockfighting.
 (e) defense (1) actor was engaged in bona fide 
experimentation for scientific research; or
 (2) conduct is generally accepted & otherwise 
lawful animal husbandry or agriculture 
practice involving livestock animals.
 (f) It is an exception (b)(6) if actor is 15 years 
of age or younger.
 (b)(6)Class C 
(b)(6)  Class A w/prior conviction
 21.09. BESTIALITY
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (a)(1) knowingly engages in contact between:
 (A) the person's mouth, anus, or genitals and the anus 
or genitals of an animal; or
 (B) the person's anus/genitals & the animal’s mouth;
 (2) fondles or touches the anus/genitals of an animal that 
is not a generally accepted or lawful animal husbandry / 
veterinary practice, includes touch thru clothing;
 (3) causes an animal to contact the person’s seminal fluid;
 (4) inserts any part of a person's body or any object into 
the anus/genitals of an animal that is not a generally 
accepted and lawful animal husbandry/veterinary practice;
 (5) possesses, sells, transfers, purchases, or otherwise 
obtains an animal with the intent that the animal be used 
for conduct described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4);
 SJF
 42.105. COCKFIGHTING. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Bridle" means a leather device designed to fit over the head and beak of a cock to prevent 
the cock from injuring another cock. 
(2) "Cock" means the male of any type of domestic fowl. 
(3) "Cockfighting" means any situation in which one cock attacks or fights with another cock. 
(4) "Gaff" means an artificial steel spur designed to attach to the leg of a cock to replace or 
supplement the cock's natural spur. 
(5) "Slasher" means a steel weapon resembling a curved knife blade designed to attach to the 
foot of a cock. 
42.105. COCKFIGHTING. (b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly: 
(1) causes a cock to fight with another cock; 
(2) participates in the earnings of a cockfight; 
(3) uses or permits another to use any real estate, building, room, tent, arena, or other 
property for cockfighting; 
(4) owns or trains a cock with the intent that the cock be used in an exhibition of cockfighting; 
(5) manufactures, buys, sells, barters, exchanges, possesses, advertises, or otherwise offers a 
gaff, slasher, or other sharp implement designed for attachment to a cock with the intent that 
the implement be used in cockfighting; or 
(6) attends as a spectator an exhibition of cockfighting. 
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the actor's conduct: (1) 
occurred solely for the purpose of or in support of breeding cocks for poultry shows in which a 
cock is judged by the cock's physical appearance; or (2) was incidental to collecting bridles, 
gaffs, or slashers. 
(d) An affirmative defense to prosecution is not available under Subsection (c) if evidence 
shows that the actor is also engaging in use of the cocks for cockfighting. 
(e) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense under this section that: (1) the actor was 
engaged in bona fide experimentation for scientific research; or (2) the conduct engaged in by 
the actor is a generally accepted and otherwise lawful animal husbandry or agriculture 
practice involving livestock animals. 
(f) It is an exception to the application of Subsection (b)(6) that the actor is 15 years of age or 
younger at the time of the offense. 
(g) An offense under Subsection (b)(1) or (2) is a state jail felony. An offense under Subsection 
(b)(3), (4), or (5) is a Class A misdemeanor. An offense under Subsection (b)(6) is a Class C 
misdemeanor, except that the offense is a Class A misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of 
the offense that the person has been previously convicted of an offense under that 
subdivision. 
21.09. BESTIALITY. (a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly: 
(1) engages in an act involving contact between: (A) the person's mouth, anus, or genitals and 
the anus or genitals of an animal; or (B) the person's anus or genitals and the mouth of the 
animal;  
(2) fondles or touches the anus or genitals of an animal in a manner that is not a generally 
accepted and otherwise lawful animal husbandry or veterinary practice, including touching 
through clothing; 
(3) causes an animal to contact the seminal fluid of the person; 
(4) inserts any part of a person's body or any object into the anus or genitals of an animal in a 
manner that is not a generally accepted and otherwise lawful animal husbandry or veterinary 
practice; 
(5) possesses, sells, transfers, purchases, or otherwise obtains an animal with the intent that 
the animal be used for conduct described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4); 
21.09. BESTIALITY
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (6) organizes, promotes, conducts, or participates as 
an observer of conduct under (1), (2), (3), or (4);
 (7) causes a person to engage or aids a person in 
conduct under (1), (2), (3), or (4);
 (8) permits conduct under (1), (2), (3), or (4) to occur 
on any premises under the person's control;
 (9) engages in conduct under (1), (2), (3), or (4) in the 
presence of a child younger than 18 years of age; or
 (10) advertises, offers, or accepts the offer of an 
animal with the intent that the animal be used in this 
state for conduct under (1), (2), (3), or (4).
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 SJF
 2°F (a)(9) or if SBI or 
Death to animal
 CHAPTER 30.01 Definitions
 BURGLARY & CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 (1)  "Habitation" means a structure or vehicle that is adapted for the 
overnight accommodation of persons, and includes:
 (A)  each separately secured or occupied portion of the structure or vehicle; &
 (B) each structure appurtenant to or connected with the structure or vehicle.
 (2)  "Building" = any enclosed structure intended for use or occupation 
as a habitation or for trade, manufacture, ornament, or use.
 (3) "Vehicle" = any device in, on, or by which any person or property is 
or may be propelled, moved, or drawn in the normal course of 
commerce or transportation, except devices classified as "habitation."
 30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 Entry and Notice
 (b) Entry: entire body & notice: 
(A) oral/written communication from 
owner or person with apparent authority; 
(B) fencing/enclosure to exclude 
intruders/contain livestock; 
(C) sign(s): notifying forbidden entry, 
(E) visible cultivating crops for humans 
being harvested, or marketable at the 
time of entry.
 Other Notices
 (D) purple paint on trees/posts: 
(i) vertical lines at least 8 inches 
in length &1 inch in width;
 (ii) bottom of mark at least 3 feet 
from ground & no more than 5;
 (iii) AND placed at readily visible 
locations for any approaching 
the property and no more than:
 (a) 100 ft. apart on forest land; 
(b) 1,000 apart on other land; 
21.09. BESTIALITY. (a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly: 
(6) organizes, promotes, conducts, or participates as an observer of conduct described by 
Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4); 
(7) causes a person to engage or aids a person in engaging in conduct described by Subdivision 
(1), (2), (3), or (4); 
(8) permits conduct described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4) to occur on any premises 
under the person's control; 
(9) engages in conduct described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4) in the presence of a child 
younger than 18 years of age; or 
(10) advertises, offers, or accepts the offer of an animal with the intent that the animal be 
used in this state for conduct described by Subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4). 
(b) An offense under this section is a state jail felony, unless the offense is committed under 
Subsection (a)(9) or results in serious bodily injury or death of the animal, in which event the 
offense is a felony of the second degree. 
(1)  "Habitation" means a structure or vehicle that is adapted for the overnight 
accommodation of persons, and includes: 
(A)  each separately secured or occupied portion of the structure or vehicle; & 
(B) each structure appurtenant to or connected with the structure or vehicle (Tennison v. 
State, 1983: appurtenant to or connected with). 
(2)  "Building" means any enclosed structure intended for use or occupation as a habitation or 
for some purpose of trade, manufacture, ornament, or use. 
(3)  "Vehicle" includes any device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may be 
propelled, moved, or drawn in the normal course of commerce or transportation, except such 
devices as are classified as "habitation." 
30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.  (b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Entry" means the intrusion of the entire body. 
OR
 (2)  "Notice" means: (A)  oral or written communication by the owner or someone with 
apparent authority to act for the owner; (B)  fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to 
exclude intruders or to contain livestock; (C)  a sign or signs posted on the property or at the 
entrance to the building, reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders, indicating 
that entry is forbidden;  (D)  the placement of identifying purple paint marks on trees or posts 
on the property, provided that the marks are: 
(i)  vertical lines of not less than eight inches in length and not less than one inch in width; 
(ii)  placed so that the bottom of the mark is not less than three feet from the ground or 
more than five feet from the ground;  and 
(iii)  placed at locations that are readily visible to any person approaching the property 
and no more than: (a)  100 feet apart on forest land;  or (b)  1,000 feet apart on land 
other than forest land;  or 
(E)  the visible presence on the property of a crop grown for human consumption that is under 
cultivation, in the process of being harvested, or marketable if harvested at the time of entry. 
30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) enters/remains on or in another’s property, 
without effective consent and the person:
 (1) had notice that the entry was forbidden; or
 (2) received notice to depart but failed to go.
 * includes land, recreational vehicle park, a 
building, an aircraft, or other vehicle 
d) 1) Class B
 Punishment Levels
 d) 2) Class C:
 • agricultural land & in 100 feet 
of the land boundary; or 
• residential land & in 100 feet of 
protected freshwater area.
 Sec. 30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) enters/remains on or in another’s property, 
without effective consent and the person:
 (1) had notice that the entry was forbidden; or
 (2) received notice to depart but failed to go.
 * includes land, recreational vehicle park, a 
building, an aircraft, or other vehicle 
d) 3) Class A:
 Punishment Levels
 • While carrying a deadly weapon
 • Habitation or shelter center
 • Treatment center in a general 
residential operation 
• Superfund site 
• Critical infrastructure facility, or
 • Higher education institution, if
 Trial shows any previous conviction type for 
remaining at a higher education institution or 
an Education Code 51.204 offense about 
trespassing at a higher education institution
 30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) enters/remains on or in another’s property, 
without effective consent and the person:
 (1) had notice that the entry was forbidden; or
 (2) received notice to depart but failed to go.
 * includes land, recreational vehicle park, a 
building, an aircraft, or other vehicle 
Punishment Levels
 d) 4) Felony 3rd Degree:
 • If trial shows it was part of a PC 
20.05(a)(2), Smuggling of 
Persons offense when the actor
 • encourages or induces one to 
enter or remain in the US in 
violation of federal law by 
concealing, harboring, or 
shielding them from detection
 Sec. 30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS
 Higher Education Institution or 
Critical Infrastructure Facility:
 (d-2 & h) If the state seeks either of these 
Class A punishment increases, the defense at 
trial may raise for the offense or past 
conviction that the defendant:
 • Engaged in 1st Amendment free speech at 
the higher education institution or
 • A critical infrastructure facility entry or 
remaining was part of a peaceful/lawful 
assembly, including attempts to exercise 
state/federal labor law rights
 Class A:
 Punishment Level
 • Higher education institution and 
trial shows a previous applicable 
conviction; or
 • Critical infrastructure facility
 • If proved by a preponderance, then the 
punishment increase would not apply.
 (a) A person commits an offense if the person enters or remains on or in property of another, 
including residential land, agricultural land, a recreational vehicle park, a building, a general 
residential operation operating as a residential treatment center, or an aircraft or other 
vehicle, without effective consent and the person: (1) had notice that the entry was 
forbidden; or (2) received notice to depart but failed to do so. 
(d)  Subject to Subsection (d-3), an offense under this section is: 
(1)  a Class B misdemeanor, except as provided by (2) and (3); 
(2) a Class C misdemeanor, except as provided by Subdivisions (3) and (4), if the offense is 
committed: (A) on agricultural land and within 100 feet of the boundary of the land; or (B) on 
residential land and within 100 feet of a protected freshwater area; 
(d) (3) an offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor if:  
(A)  the offense is committed: (i)  in a habitation or a shelter center; (ii)  on a Superfund 
site; or (iii)  on or in a critical infrastructure facility; or 
(B)  the offense is committed on or in property of an institution of higher education and 
it is shown on the trial of the offense that the person has previously been convicted of: 
(i)  an offense under this section relating to entering or remaining on or in property of an 
institution of higher education; or (ii)  an offense under Section 51.204(b)(1), Education 
Code, ((Trespass, Damage, Defacement)) relating to trespassing on the grounds of an 
institution of higher education; or 
(C)  the person carries a deadly weapon during the commission of the offense; or 
(D) the offense is committed on the property of or within a general residential operation 
operating as a residential treatment center. 
(d-1)  For the purposes of Subsection (d)(3)(B), a person has previously been convicted of an 
offense described by that paragraph if the person was adjudged guilty of the offense or 
entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in return for a grant of deferred adjudication 
community supervision, regardless of whether the sentence for the offense was ever imposed 
or whether the sentence was probated and the person was subsequently discharged from 
deferred adjudication community supervision. 
(d) Subject to Subsection (d-3), an offense under this section is: 
(4) a felony of the third degree if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the defendant 
committed the offense in the course of committing an offense under Section 20.05(a)(2). 
(d-2)  At the punishment stage of a trial in which the attorney representing the state seeks the 
increase in punishment provided by Subsection (d)(3)(B), the defendant may raise the issue as 
to whether, at the time of the instant offense or the previous offense, the defendant was 
engaging in speech or expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment to the United 
States Constitution or Section 8, Article I, Texas Constitution.  If the defendant proves the 
issue in the affirmative by a preponderance of the evidence, the increase in punishment 
provided by Subsection (d)(3)(B) does not apply. 
(h) At the punishment stage of a trial in which the attorney representing the state seeks the 
increase in punishment provided by Subsection (d)(3)(A)(iii), the defendant may raise the issue 
as to whether the defendant entered or remained on or in a critical infrastructure facility as 
part of a peaceful or lawful assembly, including an attempt to exercise rights guaranteed by 
state or federal labor laws. If the defendant proves the issue in the affirmative by a 
preponderance of the evidence, the increase in punishment provided by Subsection 
(d)(3)(A)(iii) does not apply. 
30.05 Criminal Trespass Continued
 (7)  "Critical infrastructure facility" means one of the following, if 
completely enclosed by a fence or other physical barrier that is obviously 
designed to exclude intruders:
 (A)  a chemical manufacturing facility;
 (B)  a refinery;
 (C)  an electrical power generating facility, substation, switching station, electrical control 
center, or electrical transmission or distribution facility;
 (D)  a water intake structure, water treatment facility, wastewater treatment plant, or pump 
station;
 (E)  a natural gas transmission compressor station;
 (F)  a liquid natural gas terminal or storage facility;
 (G)  a telecommunications central switching office;
 (H)  a port, railroad switching yard, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation 
facility;
 (I)  a gas processing plant, including a plant used in the processing, treatment, or 
fractionation of natural gas; or
 (J)  a transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or television station.
 30.05 Criminal Trespass Continued
 (3)  "Shelter center" defined under 51.002, Human Resources Code.
 (4)  "Forest land" means land on which the trees are potentially valuable 
for timber products.
 (5) "Agricultural land" has the meaning assigned by Section 75.001, 
Civil Practice and Remedies Code.
 (6)  "Superfund site" means a facility that:
 (A)  is on the National Priorities List established under 105 of the 
federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, 
and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. Section 9605);  or
 (B)  is listed on the state registry established under Section 361.181, 
Health and Safety Code.
 30.05 Criminal Trespass Continued
 (8)  "Protected freshwater area" has the meaning assigned by Section 90.001, 
Parks and Wildlife Code.
 (10)  "Recreational vehicle park" means a tract of land that has rental spaces for 
two or more recreational vehicles, as defined by Section 522.004, 
Transportation Code.
 (11) "Residential land" means real property improved by a dwelling and zoned 
for or otherwise authorized for single-family or multifamily use.
 (12)  “Institution of higher education” has the meaning assigned by Section 
61.003, Education Code.
 (13) "General residential operation" has the meaning assigned by Section 
42.002, Human Resources Code.
 30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS: 
Firearms Postings
 Firearms Notice
 (c) A person may provide notice that firearms 
are prohibited by posting a sign at each 
entrance to the property that:
 (1) has language identical or substantially 
similar to: "Pursuant to Section 30.05, Penal 
Code (criminal trespass), a person may not 
enter this property with a firearm";
 Punishment levels
 (d-3) Class C: not to exceed $200 
for a forbidden firearm or other 
weapon entry UNLESS
 (2) in both English and Spanish;
 (3) in contrasting colors with block letters at 
least one inch in height; and
 (4) displayed in a conspicuous manner clearly 
visible to the public.
 Class A: trial shows that after entry 
the actor received personal notice 
from the owner/other w/authority & 
if reasonably unable to understand, 
other personal notice, reasonable for 
the circumstances; and then failed 
to depart.
 (7) "Critical infrastructure facility" means one of the following, if completely enclosed by a 
fence or other physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders: 
(A) a chemical manufacturing facility;  
(B) a refinery; 
(C) an electrical power generating facility, substation, switching station, electrical control 
center, or electrical transmission or distribution facility; 
(D) a water intake structure, water treatment facility, wastewater treatment plant, or pump 
station; 
(E) a natural gas transmission compressor station; 
(F) a liquid natural gas terminal or storage facility; 
(G) a telecommunications central switching office; 
(H) a port, railroad switching yard, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation facility; 
(I) a gas processing plant, including a plant used in the processing, treatment, or fractionation 
of natural gas; or 
(J) a transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or television station. 
(3) "Shelter center" has the meaning assigned by Section 51.002, Human Resources Code. 
(4) "Forest land" means land on which the trees are potentially valuable for timber products. 
(5) "Agricultural land" has the meaning assigned by Section 75.001, Civil Practice and 
Remedies Code. 
(6) "Superfund site" means a facility that: (A) is on the National Priorities List established 
under Section 105 of the federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. Section 9605); or (B) is listed on the state registry established 
under Section 361.181, Health and Safety Code. 
(8) "Protected freshwater area" has the meaning assigned by Section 90.001, Parks and 
Wildlife Code. 
(10) "Recreational vehicle park" has the meaning assigned by Section 13.087, Water Code. 
(11) "Residential land" means real property improved by a dwelling and zoned for or 
otherwise authorized for single-family or multifamily use. 
(12) "Institution of higher education" has the meaning assigned by Section 61.003, Education 
Code. 
(13) "General residential operation" has the meaning assigned by Section 42.002, Human 
Resources Code. 
30.05.  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.   
(c)  A person may provide notice that firearms are prohibited on the property by posting a sign 
at each entrance to the property that:  
(1)  includes language that is identical to or substantially similar to the following: "Pursuant to 
Section 30.05, Penal Code (criminal trespass), a person may not enter this property with a 
firearm"; 
(2)  includes the language described by Subdivision (1) in both English and Spanish; 
(3)  appears in contrasting colors with block letters at least one inch in height; and 
(4) is displayed in a conspicuous manner clearly visible to the public.  
(d-3)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to 
exceed $200 if the person enters the property, land, or building with a firearm or other 
weapon and the sole basis on which entry on the property or land or in the building was 
forbidden is that entry with a firearm or other weapon was forbidden, except that the offense 
is a Class A misdemeanor if it is show on the trial of the offense that, after entering the 
property, land, or building with the firearm or other weapon, the actor: 
(1)  personally received from the owner of the property or another person with 
apparent authority to act for the owner notice that entry with a firearm or other 
weapon was forbidden, as given through: (A)  notice under Subsection (b)(2)(A), 
including oral or written communication; or (B)  if the actor is unable to reasonably 
understand the notice described by Paragraph (A), other personal notice that is 
reasonable under the circumstances; and 
(2)  subsequently failed to depart.  
30.05 Criminal Trespass Non-applicability
 (i) This section does not apply if:
 (1) basis for entry on the property, land, or building was forbidden is that 
entry with a handgun or other weapon was forbidden; and
 (2)  the actor at the time of the offense was a peace officer, including a 
commissioned peace officer of a recognized state, or 
• a special investigator under CCP 2.122, 
• regardless of whether the peace officer or special investigator was engaged 
in the actual discharge of an official duty while carrying the weapon.
 (9)  "Recognized state" means another state with which the attorney general of 
this state, with the approval of the governor of this state, negotiated an 
agreement after determining that the other state:
 (A)  has firearm proficiency requirements for peace officers; and
 (B)  fully recognizes the right of peace officers commissioned in this state to 
carry weapons in the other state.
 (i) This section does not apply if: (1) the basis on which entry on the property or land or in the 
building was forbidden is that entry with a handgun or other weapon was forbidden; and (2) 
the actor at the time of the offense was a peace officer, including a commissioned peace 
officer of a recognized state, or a special investigator under Article 2A.002, Code of Criminal 
Procedure, regardless of whether the peace officer or special investigator was engaged in the 
actual discharge of an official duty while carrying the weapon. 
(9) "Recognized state" means another state with which the attorney general of this state, with 
the approval of the governor of this state, negotiated an agreement after determining that 
the other state: (A) has firearm proficiency requirements for peace officers; and (B) fully 
recognizes the right of peace officers commissioned in this state to carry weapons in the other 
state. 
30.05 Criminal Trespass Defenses (e)
 (1) firefighter or emergency medical services personnel acting in the lawful 
discharge of an official duty under exigent circumstances;
 (2) a person who was an employee or agent of:
 (i) an electric utility;
 (ii) a telecommunications;
 (iii) a video service provider or cable service provider;
 (iv) a gas utility; or
 (v) a pipeline used for the transportation or sale of oil, gas, or related products; 
and performing a duty within the scope of that employment or agency; or
 (3) a person employed by or acting as agent for an entity that had, or that 
reasonably believed had, effective consent or authorization provided by law; & 
performing a duty within the scope of that employment or agency.
 30.05 Criminal Trespass Defenses (f)
 (f) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
 (1) the basis on which entry on the property or land or in the building 
was forbidden is that entry with a handgun was forbidden; and
 (2) the person was carrying:
 (A) a license issued under Chapter 411, Government Code, to carry 
a handgun; and
 (B) a handgun:
 (i) in a concealed manner; or
 (ii) in a holster.
 (e) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor at the time of the offense 
was: 
(1) a firefighter or emergency medical services personnel, as defined by Section 773.003, 
Health and Safety Code, acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty under exigent 
circumstances; 
(2) a person who was: (A) an employee or agent of: (i) an electric utility, as defined by Section 
31.002, Utilities Code; (ii) a telecommunications provider, as defined by Section 51.002, 
Utilities Code; (iii) a video service provider or cable service provider, as defined by Section 
66.002, Utilities Code; (iv) a gas utility, as defined by Section 101.003, Utilities Code, which for 
the purposes of this subsection includes a municipally owned utility as defined by that section; 
(v) a gas utility, as defined by Section 121.001, Utilities Code; (vi) a pipeline used for the 
transportation or sale of oil, gas, or related products; or (vii) an electric cooperative or 
municipally owned utility, as defined by Section 11.003, Utilities Code; and 
(B) performing a duty within the scope of that employment or agency; or 
(3) a person who was: (A) employed by or acting as agent for an entity that had, or that the 
person reasonably believed had, effective consent or authorization provided by law to enter 
the property; and (B) performing a duty within the scope of that employment or agency. 
"Emergency medical services personnel" means: (A) emergency care attendant; (B) 
emergency medical technicians; (C) advanced emergency medical technicians; (D) emergency 
medical technicians--paramedic; or (E) licensed paramedic. 
(f) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the basis on which entry on the property or land or in the building was forbidden is that 
entry with a handgun was forbidden; and 
(2) the person was carrying: (A) a license issued under Subchapter H, Chapter 411, 
Government Code, to carry a handgun; and (B) a handgun: (i) in a concealed manner; or (ii) in 
a holster. 
30.05 Criminal Trespass Defenses 
for Rental Type Property (f-1 thru f-4)
 It is a defense to prosecution under this section that:
 (1) the basis on which entry on the property was forbidden is that entry with 
a firearm or firearm ammunition was forbidden;
 (2) the actor is: 
F-1 an owner of an apartment in a condominium regime, an owner of a 
condominium unit, a tenant or guest of an owner of these, or a guest of a 
tenant of an owner of these;
 F-2 a tenant of a leased premises or the tenant's guest; 
F-3 a tenant of a manufactured home lot or the tenant's guest; or
 F-4 a guest of a hotel
 30.05 Criminal Trespass Defenses 
for Rental Type Property (f-1 thru f-4)
 It is a defense if (3) the actor:
 (A) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the condominium 
apartment, unit owner's apartment or unit, tenant's rental unit, tenant's 
manufactured home, or actor's hotel room;
 (B) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the 
above locations;
 (C) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the 
actor's vehicle located in a parking area provided for residents or guests of 
the above; or
 (D) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the actor's vehicle 
located in a parking area provided for residents or guests of the above; AND
 (4) the actor is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing a firearm 
or firearm ammunition.
 30.05 Criminal Trespass Defenses Continued
 (g) Defense under this section that the actor entered a railroad switching 
yard or any part of a railroad switching yard and was at that time an 
employee or a representative of employees exercising a right under the 
Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. Section 151 et seq.).
 (f-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the basis on which entry on the property was forbidden is that entry with a firearm or 
firearm ammunition was forbidden;  
(2) the actor is: 
(A) an owner of an apartment in a condominium regime governed by Chapter 81, Property 
Code; 
(B) an owner of a condominium unit governed by Chapter 82, Property Code; 
(C) a tenant or guest of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); or 
(D) a guest of a tenant of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); 
(f-2) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the basis on which entry on a leased premises governed by Chapter 92, Property Code, was 
forbidden is that entry with a firearm or firearm ammunition was forbidden; 
(2) the actor is a tenant of the leased premises or the tenant's guest; 
(f-3) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the basis on which entry on a leased premises governed by Chapter 94, Property Code, was 
forbidden is that entry with a firearm or firearm ammunition was forbidden; 
(2) the actor is a tenant of a manufactured home lot or the tenant's guest; 
(f-4) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the conduct occurred on hotel property, and the basis on which entry on that property was 
forbidden is that entry with a firearm or firearm ammunition was forbidden; 
(2) the actor is a guest of a hotel, as defined by Section 2155.101, Occupations Code; and 
(f-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(3) the actor: (A) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the condominium 
apartment or unit owner's apartment or unit; (B) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition 
directly en route to or from the condominium apartment or unit owner's apartment or unit; 
(C) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the actor's vehicle 
located in a parking area provided for residents or guests of the condominium property; or (D) 
carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the actor's vehicle located in a parking 
area provided for residents or guests of the condominium property; and 
(4) the actor is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing a firearm or firearm 
ammunition. 
(f-2) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(3) the actor: (A) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the tenant's rental unit; 
(B) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the tenant's rental 
unit; (C) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the actor's 
vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or guests by the landlord of the leased 
premises; or (D) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the actor's vehicle 
located in a parking area provided for tenants or guests by the landlord of the leased 
premises; and 
(4) the actor is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing a firearm or firearm 
ammunition. 
(f-3) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(3) the actor: (A) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the tenant's 
manufactured home; (B) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from 
the tenant's manufactured home; (C) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en 
route to or from the actor's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or tenants' 
guests by the landlord of the leased premises; or (D) carries or stores a firearm or firearm 
ammunition in the actor's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or tenants' 
guests by the landlord of the leased premises; and 
(4) the actor is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing a firearm or firearm 
ammunition. 
(f-4) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(3) the actor: (A) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the actor's hotel room; 
(B) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from the hotel or the 
actor's hotel room; (C) carries a firearm or firearm ammunition directly en route to or from 
the actor's vehicle located on the hotel property, including a vehicle in a parking area provided 
for hotel guests; or (D) carries or stores a firearm or firearm ammunition in the actor's vehicle 
located on the hotel property, including a vehicle in a parking area provided for hotel guests. 
(g)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor entered a railroad switching 
yard or any part of a railroad switching yard and was at that time an employee or a 
representative of employees exercising a right under the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. Section 
151 et seq.) 
30.06. TRESPASS BY LICENSE HOLDER WITH A 
CONCEALED HANDGUN
 Conduct: Offense if a license holder:
 (a)(1) carries a concealed handgun on another’s 
property without effective consent; and
 (2)  received notice that the entry was forbidden.
 (b) Receives notice = property owner/someone with 
apparent authority provides by oral/written comm. 
(3) Written = 
(A) card/document with language identical: 
"Pursuant to Section 30.06, Penal Code Trespass by 
license holder with a concealed handgun, a person 
licensed under . . . may not enter this property with 
a concealed handgun"; or
 (B) sign posted with the above lang. in English & 
Spanish; in contrasting colors with block letters at 
least 1 inch high; and displayed conspicuously and 
clearly visible to the public.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 d) Class C not to exceed $200, UNLESS
 Class A if trials shows there was personal 
oral notice & actor did not depart
 (e) Exception if property is owned/leased 
by gov’t entity &not a 46.03 proh. premise
 (f) Defense if license holder is volunteer 
emergency services personnel under 46.01.
 (f-1) Defense: 1st responder who:
 (1) has an unexpired completion cert;
 (2) engaged in actual duty discharge; &
 (3) employed/supervised by municipality/ 
county
 (g) Defense: holder was personally given 
oral notice & promptly departed
 NOT Binding
 30.06. TRESPASS BY LICENSE HOLDER WITH A CONCEALED HANDGUN. (a) A license holder 
commits an offense if the license holder: 
(1) carries a concealed handgun under the authority of Subchapter H, Chapter 411, 
Government Code, on property of another without effective consent; and 
(2) received notice that entry on the property by a license holder with a concealed handgun 
was forbidden. 
(b) For purposes of this section, a person receives notice if the owner of the property or 
someone with apparent authority to act for the owner provides notice to the person by oral 
or written communication. 
(d) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed 
$200, except that the offense is a Class A misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense 
that, after entering the property, the license holder was personally given the notice by oral 
communication described by Subsection (b) and subsequently failed to depart. 
(e) It is an exception to the application of this section that the property on which the license 
holder carries a handgun is owned or leased by a governmental entity and is not a premises or 
other place on which the license holder is prohibited from carrying the handgun under Section 
46.03. 
(f) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is volunteer 
emergency services personnel, as defined by Section 46.01. 
(f-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is a first 
responder, as defined by Section 46.01, who: 
(1) holds an unexpired certificate of completion under Section 411.1883, Government Code, 
at the time of engaging in the applicable conduct; 
(2) was engaged in the actual discharge of the first responder's duties while carrying the 
handgun; and 
(3) was employed or supervised by a municipality or county to which Chapter 179, Local 
Government Code, applies. 
(g) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder was personally 
given notice by oral communication described by Subsection (b) and promptly departed from 
the property. 
(c) In this section: 
(1) "Entry" has the meaning assigned by Section 30.05(b). 
(2) "License holder" has the meaning assigned by Section 46.03. 
(3) "Written communication" means: 
(A) a card or other document on which is written language identical to the following: 
"Pursuant to Section 30.06, Penal Code (trespass by license holder with a concealed handgun), 
a person licensed under Subchapter H, Chapter 411, Government Code (handgun licensing 
law), may not enter this property with a concealed handgun"; or 
(B) a sign posted on the property that: 
(i) includes the language described by Paragraph (A) in both English and Spanish; 
(ii) appears in contrasting colors with block letters at least one inch in height; and 
(iii) is displayed in a conspicuous manner clearly visible to the public. 
Legally Binding
 30.06 TRESPASS BY CONCEALED LICENSE HOLDER: 
Has the Same Defenses found in the Criminal Trespass Law
 for Owners of & Rental Type Property Tenant/Guests (e-1 thru e-4)
 1) owner of an apartment in a condominium regime, an owner of a condominium unit, a tenant or guest 
of an owner of these, or a guest of a tenant of an owner of these;
 2) a tenant of a leased premises or the tenant's guest; 
3) a tenant of a manufactured home lot or the tenant's guest; or
 4) a guest of a hotel
 (e-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is: (A) an owner of an apartment in a condominium regime governed by 
Chapter 81, Property Code; (B) an owner of a condominium unit governed by Chapter 82, 
Property Code; (C) a tenant or guest of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); or (D) a 
guest of a tenant of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the condominium apartment or unit 
owner's apartment or unit; (B) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the 
condominium apartment or unit owner's apartment or unit; (C) carries a handgun directly en 
route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for residents or 
guests of the condominium property; or (D) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's 
vehicle located in a parking area provided for residents or guests of the condominium 
property. 
(e-2) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is a tenant of a leased premises governed by Chapter 92, Property Code, 
or the tenant's guest; and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the tenant's rental unit; (B) carries a 
handgun directly en route to or from the tenant's rental unit; (C) carries a handgun directly en 
route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or 
guests by the landlord of the leased premises; or (D) carries or stores a handgun in the license 
holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or guests by the landlord of the 
leased premises. 
(e-3) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is a tenant of a manufactured home lot governed by Chapter 94, 
Property Code, or the tenant's guest; and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the tenant's manufactured home; (B) 
carries a handgun directly en route to or from the tenant's manufactured home; (C) carries a 
handgun directly en route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area 
provided for tenants or tenants' guests by the landlord of the leased premises; or (D) carries 
or stores a handgun in the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for 
tenants or tenants' guests by the landlord of the leased premises. 
(e-4) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is a guest of a 
hotel, as defined by Section 2155.101, Occupations Code, and the license holder: 
(1) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's hotel room; 
(2) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the hotel or the license holder's hotel room; 
(3) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the license holder's vehicle located on the 
hotel property, including a vehicle in a parking area provided for hotel guests; or 
(4) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's vehicle located on the hotel property, 
including a vehicle in a parking area provided for hotel guests. 
30.07. TRESPASS BY LICENSE HOLDER WITH AN 
OPENLY CARRIED HANDGUN
 Conduct: Offense if a license holder:
 (a)(1) openly carries a handgun on another’s 
property without effective consent; and 
(2) received notice that the entry was forbidden.
 (b) Receives notice is the same
 (3) Written = (A) card/document with language 
identical: "Pursuant to Section 30.07, Penal Code 
(trespass by license holder with an openly carried 
handgun), a person licensed under . . . may not 
enter this property with a handgun that is carried 
openly"; or
 (B) sign posted with the above lang. in English & 
Spanish; in with the same contrasting colors and 
block letters
 Defenses & Enhancements
 d) Class C not to exceed $200, UNLESS
 Class A if trials shows there was personal 
oral notice & actor did not depart
 (e) Exception if owned/leased by a gov’t 
entity & not a 46.03 prohibited premise
 (e-1 thru 4) same rental type property 
defenses
 (f) NO defense that it was in a holster
 (g) Defense for volunteer emergency 
services 
(g-1) Same Defenses for 1st responders with 
current license, on duty municipal/county
 (g) Defense: if personally given oral notice 
and promptly departed from the property.
 30.07. TRESPASS BY LICENSE HOLDER WITH AN OPENLY CARRIED HANDGUN. (a) A license 
holder commits an offense if the license holder: 
(1) openly carries a handgun under the authority of Subchapter H, Chapter 411, Government 
Code, on property of another without effective consent; and 
(2) received notice that entry on the property by a license holder openly carrying a handgun 
was forbidden. 
(b) For purposes of this section, a person receives notice if the owner of the property or 
someone with apparent authority to act for the owner provides notice to the person by oral 
or written communication. 
(d) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed 
$200, except that the offense is a Class A misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense 
that, after entering the property, the license holder was personally given the notice by oral 
communication described by Subsection (b) and subsequently failed to depart. 
(e) It is an exception to the application of this section that the property on which the license 
holder openly carries the handgun is owned or leased by a governmental entity and is not a 
premises or other place on which the license holder is prohibited from carrying the handgun 
under Section 46.03. 
(e-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is: (A) an owner of an apartment in a condominium regime governed by 
Chapter 81, Property Code; (B) an owner of a condominium unit governed by Chapter 82, 
Property Code; (C) a tenant or guest of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); or (D) a 
guest of a tenant of an owner described by Paragraph (A) or (B); and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the condominium apartment or unit 
owner's apartment or unit; (B) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the 
condominium apartment or unit owner's apartment or unit; (C) carries a handgun directly en 
route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for residents or 
guests of the condominium property; or (D) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's 
vehicle located in a parking area provided for residents or guests of the condominium 
property. 
(e-2) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is a tenant of a leased premises governed by Chapter 92, Property Code, 
or the tenant's guest; and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the tenant's rental unit; (B) carries a 
handgun directly en route to or from the tenant's rental unit; (C) carries a handgun directly en 
route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or 
guests by the landlord of the leased premises; or (D) carries or stores a handgun in the license 
holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for tenants or guests by the landlord of the 
leased premises. 
(e-3) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1) the license holder is a tenant of a manufactured home lot governed by Chapter 94, 
Property Code, or the tenant's guest; and 
(2) the license holder: (A) carries or stores a handgun in the tenant's manufactured home; (B) 
carries a handgun directly en route to or from the tenant's manufactured home; (C) carries a 
handgun directly en route to or from the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area 
provided for tenants or tenants' guests by the landlord of the leased premises; or (D) carries 
or stores a handgun in the license holder's vehicle located in a parking area provided for 
tenants or tenants' guests by the landlord of the leased premises. 
(e-4) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is a guest of a 
hotel, as defined by Section 2155.101, Occupations Code, and the license holder: 
(1) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's hotel room; 
(2) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the hotel or the license holder's hotel room; 
(3) carries a handgun directly en route to or from the license holder's vehicle located on the 
hotel property, including a vehicle in a parking area provided for hotel guests; or 
(4) carries or stores a handgun in the license holder's vehicle located on the hotel property, 
including a vehicle in a parking area provided for hotel guests. 
(f) It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the handgun was carried in a 
holster. 
(g) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is volunteer 
emergency services personnel, as defined by Section 46.01. 
(g-1) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder is a first 
responder, as defined by Section 46.01, who: 
(1) holds an unexpired certificate of completion under Section 411.1883, Government Code, 
at the time of engaging in the applicable conduct; 
(2) was engaged in the actual discharge of the first responder's duties while carrying the 
handgun; and 
(3) was employed or supervised by a municipality or county to which Chapter 179, Local 
Government Code, applies. 
Legally Binding
 (h) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the license holder was personally 
given notice by oral communication described by Subsection (b) and promptly departed from 
the property. 
(c) In this section: 
(1) "Entry" has the meaning assigned by Section 30.05(b). 
(2) "License holder" has the meaning assigned by Section 46.03. 
(3) "Written communication" means: 
(A) a card or other document on which is written language identical to the following: 
"Pursuant to Section 30.07, Penal Code (trespass by license holder with an openly carried 
handgun), a person licensed under Subchapter H, Chapter 411, Government Code (handgun 
licensing law), may not enter this property with a handgun that is carried openly"; or 
(B) a sign posted on the property that: 
(i) includes the language described by Paragraph (A) in both English and Spanish; 
(ii) appears in contrasting colors with block letters at least one inch in height; and 
(iii) is displayed in a conspicuous manner clearly visible to the public at each entrance to the 
property. 
Questions
 Escalating Offenses for Property and Trespass 
Read the scenario up to the next number, then stop and select the best highest offense, if any 
apply, that you have up to that point.  Then, keeping in mind what you just read, continue to 
the next number and do the same.  Use the letter choices on slide above for your selections.  
Access the scenario via handout or the self poling software 
Conclusion 
•Q/A session? 
•Review Game/Quiz? 