TCOLE ARREST, SEARCH, & SEIZURE FOR VEHICLES & TRAFFIC STOPS STUDY CONTENT
==============================================================================

INSTRUCTIONS: Simply copy and paste your study handout content below. 
The system will automatically create flashcards and quiz questions from this content.

Just paste your content here - no special formatting needed!
Example format:

VEHICLE SEARCHES AND TRAFFIC STOPS

FOURTH AMENDMENT BASICS
- Protection against unreasonable searches and seizures
- Warrant requirement and exceptions
- Probable cause standards
- Reasonable suspicion vs. probable cause

TRAFFIC STOP PROCEDURES
1. Initial contact and officer safety
2. Identification requirements
3. Passenger rights and obligations
4. Duration and scope limitations

AUTOMOBILE EXCEPTION
- Mobile nature of vehicles
- Reduced expectation of privacy
- Probable cause requirement
- Scope of search authorization

SEARCH INCIDENT TO ARREST
- Immediate area of control
- Officer safety concerns
- Evidence preservation
- Vehicle compartment access

PASSENGER CONSIDERATIONS
- Ordering passengers out
- Passenger searches
- Belongings and purses
- Separate probable cause requirements

---

PASTE YOUR STUDY HANDOUT CONTENT BELOW:
=======================================
• Instructor intro if needed 
Introduction 
Arrest, Search, & Seizure 
for Vehicles & Traffic Stops
 1
 REMEMBER Traffic Stops are NOT FOREVER? 

 Investigative detentions beyond a traffic violation 
REQUIRE further reasonable suspicion
 
 YOU MUST BUILD the REASONABLE SUSPICION 
DURING THE T
STOP ROUTINE 
• Access proper handout(s) 
• A traffic stop that turns into an investigative stop must have new reasonable suspicion to 
detain beyond the reasonable time needed to handle the initial traffic violation. 
3 Good Questions for Checking Reasonable Suspicion Stops 
• What about the occupant caught your attention? 
• What was inconsistent with innocent conduct (unordinary from the norm)? 
• What was consistent with criminal conduct? 
Unit Goal: Narcotic interdiction/investigation techniques and procedures.  
15.14. Identify the incidence of drug interdiction and common characteristics of drug 
smugglers and their vehicles.  
How the vehicle is being operated  
• Not consistent with traffic flow: driver is overly cautious, slow, or fast 
• Driver/passengers repeatedly look at police car through mirrors or by turning around 
• Unusual pull-over behavior 
• Exiting suddenly or Hiding  
• Traffic violations  
• Quick exits from the vehicle after the stop 
• Unusual circumstances or items in the vehicle 
Vehicles used as load cars for narcotics:  
• Reliable vehicle with large capacity  
• Inconspicuous vehicle to blend in  
• False compartments in interior or exterior  
• Vehicle trim on the side of a pickup (for example) does not line up due to the lowering or 
raising the cab to accommodate false compartments  
• Lug nuts or vehicle body screws and bolts appear to have been tampered with/tool markings  
• Vehicle not registered to driver (rental car or another third-party owner)  
• Driver does not know who the vehicle belongs to  
Actions of the driver  
• Nervousness • Fidgeting • Eye contact  
From drug interdiction incident to routine patrol, always be observant. Keep eyes, ears, and 
nose open, in addition to asking questions.  
15.15. Identify factors contributing to probable cause in drug investigation and appropriate 
interview techniques.  
Typical characteristics of drug smugglers:  
• Extended travel without luggage or minimal luggage  
• Luggage carried on back seat  
• Empty suitcases/bags  
• Appears nervous upon contact with officer  
• Driver attempts to separate from the vehicle (may not claim ownership of anything, exit 
quickly upon being stopped, physically move away from vehicle)  
Factors contributing to probable cause:  
• Nervousness of suspect 
• Lack of identification/incorrect identification  
• Lack of registration and/or insurance  
• Appearance of vehicle  
• Stories given by suspects do not match or make sense  
• Pungent odor of certain controlled substances emanating from the vehicle  
• Driver states he does not have a key to trunk or other compartments such as glove box  
• Vehicle appears to be heavily laden  
Interview techniques:  
• Separate suspects and compare answers (including answers to the following items)  
• Establish identity of driver and or passenger  
• Inquire as to origin destination and purpose of trip  
• Ask for registration and insurance  
• Inquire about the ownership of vehicle  
• Ask for rental agreement (if rental car) to verify dates match stated agenda  
• Be aware for uncooperative, evasive, or implausible answers 
• Be aware of their Risk Zones (Face/chest, waist, hands, & stance)? 
• Criminal history and wanted checks? 
• Continually compare what you have seen & heard already 
• Plain view/smell 
• Consent or probable cause searches 
10
 Warrantless Searches of Motor Vehicles
 
 Carroll Doctrine
 : Automobile Exception (Carroll v U.S., 1925)
 
 Probable cause
 that a vehicle contains evidence/contraband would allow for a 
warrantless search of a 
readily mobile
 
 vehicle 
There is lessened expectation of privacy for motor vehicles in 
public areas
 PC and Automobile Searches
 
 12
 What about any containers (locked or unlocked) therein, in 
which the contraband or evidence would fit?
 
 O
 fficers may search vehicles, bumper to bumper, & any containers inside 
(locked/unlocked), where RELATED contraband/evidence would fit 
13
 What if the PC is specifically related to a 
container inside a vehicle?
 
 Police may search the container, but the search is limited to the specific 
container, unless there is PC for the vehicle as well.
 14
 Instructor Note: Undercover officers may exhibit similar characteristics, i.e., lack of 
identification, association with known offenders, fictitious registration on vehicles, avoiding 
problem of public recognition. Proceed with caution to allow undercover officers to continue 
their cover.  
Presentation 
10.8. Describe the basic criteria for warrantless search. 
The Carroll Doctrine (1925) 
• Officers can search an automobile without a warrant if the officer has probable cause for the 
search.  
• The mobility of the vehicle prevented officers from being able to obtain a warrant. 
Wyoming v Houghton, 1999 
• U.S. v Ross, 1982 permitted warrantless searches of all containers in a car if there is probable 
cause to search the car.  
• Houghton decided that there is no distinction made between containers owned by the driver 
and those owned by anyone else. As long as there is probable cause to search the car, any 
containers in the car may be searched, regardless of ownership. There is a reduced 
expectation of privacy in things a person carries in a car. 
• With PC, the car may be searched bumper to bumper and any containers inside (locked or 
unlocked) that evidence or contraband related to the PC would fit.  
California v Acevedo, 1991 
If the police have probable cause to believe that a container in a moveable car contains 
contraband, they may search the container without a warrant. However, their search must be 
limited to that specific container, unless they have probable cause to believe that the car itself 
contains contraband, too.  
What if the vehicle is parked in the 
driveway/curtilage of a house?
 
 Curtilage: 
area of open space surrounding a dwelling, immediately 
adjacent & 
considered part of the house
 .
 
 Collins v Virginia
 Plain View and Traffic Stops
 Texas v Brown
 Vehicle Searches Incidental to Lawful Arrest
 
 Arrested
 Occupants
 :
 passenger compartment
 of a motor vehicle 
may be searched incident to arrest, only if (Arizona v Gant):
 
 officers can demonstrate the reason to believe 
evidence of the crime for 
which the suspect was arrested will be found in the car
 .  

 Arizona v. Gant
 (2009)
 Colorado v Bertine: Impounds & Inventories
 Impounds and Inventory Searches
 
 There must be an agency policy to make the inventory legal
 
 Locked containers within the vehicle are fair game, if allowed by policy.
 
 Unreasonably impounded vehicles, based solely on department policy, 
but not normal practice, will not be a sufficient basis
 
 They should NOT be used to get around the limitations of a 
search incident to arrest.
 Collins v Virginia, 2018 
The automobile exception to the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution does not allow a warrantless search of a vehicle located within a home or its 
curtilage. 
15
 16
 Texas v Brown, 1983 
The plain-view exception applied because (1) the items were in plain view through the vehicle’s 
window; (2) Officer had probable cause, based on his prior narcotics experience, to believe that 
the tied-off balloon contained narcotics; and (3) Officer had access to view the items pursuant to 
a lawful driver’s license checkpoint detention.  SO even though he couldn’t see the drugs, the 
plain view of the container type made it “immediately apparent” to the officer that contraband 
was inside. 
Gant v Arizona, 2009 
• Police may search a vehicle after a recent occupant’s arrest only if the arrestee is within 
reaching distance of the passenger compartment at the time of the search or there is a 
reasonable to believe that crime-related evidence is located in the vehicle.  
• If valid, a search incident to an arrest would include the arrestee’s person and the area 
within his immediate control/the passenger compartment of a vehicle. 
17
 18
 19
 • The case simply says you must be able to reasonably articulate why you expected the search 
incidental to an arrest of any occupant would reveal evidence related to the arrest reason. If 
valid the search incident to the arrest would be limited to the passenger compartment of the 
vehicle. 
Colorado v. Bertine, 1987 
A police officer’s warrantless inventory search of closed containers inside an automobile, if 
pursuant to an established departmental inventory policy, does not violate the 4th 
Amendment.  Reasonable police regulations relating to inventory procedures administered in 
good faith satisfy the 4th Amendment. Inventory-search procedures are NOT investigatory.  They 
serve the interests of protecting seized property against of claims of property lost, stolen, 
damage or vandalism. 
• There must be an agency policy to make the inventory legal 
• Locked containers within the vehicle are fair game, if allowed by policy. 
• Unreasonably impounded vehicles, based solely on department policy, but not normal 
practice, will not be a sufficient basis 
• They should NOT be used to get around the limitations of a search incident to arrest. 
Can Police Frisk a Vehicle?
 
 Michigan v. Long, 1983
 
 A limited search of the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle for weapons.  
Michigan v. Long, 1983 
If officers reasonably believe a suspect is dangerous, it is consistent with Terry to permit a 
search of a vehicle’s passenger compartment if a law-enforcement reasonably believes a 
suspect is dangerous and may gain immediate control of weapons. The search must be limited 
to those areas in which a weapon may be placed or hidden. 
20
 15.16. Identify and explain the common places of concealment of controlled substances and 
dangerous drugs on or in persons, places, and things. 
In vehicles:  
• Glove box  
• Under or inside of dash  
• Under carpet  
• Gas tanks  
• Hub caps  
• Headliner  
• A/C ducts or vents  
• Trunk  
• Console/cupholders  
• Door panels  
• Spare tire  
• Engine compartment  
• Ash tray  
• Luggage/bags/personal items  
• Decorations  
• Miscellaneous items (food packages, boxes, etc.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intoxication & Vehicle Related Offenses
 49.01. DEFINITIONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (1) "Alcohol concentration" = the number of grams of alcohol per:
 (A) 210 liters of breath;
 (B) 100 milliliters of blood; or
 (C) 67 milliliters of urine.
 (2) "Intoxicated" means:
 (A)not having the normal use of mental or physical faculties by the introduction of alcohol, a 
controlled substance, a drug, a dangerous drug, a combination of two or more of those 
substances, or any other substance into the body; or
 (B) having an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more.
 49.01. Definitions
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (3) "Motor vehicle" defined by 32.34(a): 2) device in, on, or by which a person or property is or may 
be transported or drawn on a highway, except a device used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
 (4) "Watercraft" a vessel, 1 or more water skis, an aquaplane, or another device used for transporting 
or carrying a person on water, other than a device propelled only by the current of water.
 (5) "Amusement ride" has the meaning assigned by Section 2151.002, Occupations Code.
 (6) "Mobile amusement ride" has the meaning assigned by Section 2151.002, Occupations Code.
 8.33. Define intoxication, list, and apply the elements of offenses involving intoxication.  
49.01. DEFINITIONS. In this chapter: 
(1) "Alcohol concentration" means the number of grams of alcohol per:  
(A) 210 liters of breath; (B) 100 milliliters of blood; or (C) 67 milliliters of urine. 
(2) "Intoxicated" means: 
(A) not having the normal use of mental or physical faculties by reason of the introduction of 
alcohol, a controlled substance, a drug, a dangerous drug, a combination of two or more of 
those substances, or any other substance into the body; or 
(B) having an alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more. 
(3) "Motor vehicle" has the meaning assigned by Section 32.34(a): 2) device in, on, or by which a 
person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway, except a device used 
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. 
(4) "Watercraft" means a vessel, one or more water skis, an aquaplane, or another device used 
for transporting or carrying a person on water, other than a device propelled only by the current 
of water. 
(5) "Amusement ride" has the meaning assigned by Section 2151.002, Occupations Code. 
(6) "Mobile amusement ride" has the meaning assigned by Section 2151.002, Occupations Code. 
49.11. PROOF OF MENTAL STATE UNNECESSARY. 
Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (a) Notwithstanding Section 6.02(b), proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction 
of an offense under this chapter.
 BEVERAGE IN MOTOR VEHICLE)
 (b) Subsection (a) does not apply to an offense under Section 49.031 (POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC 
49.02. PUBLIC INTOXICATION
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) appears in a public place while intoxicated to the degree that the 
person may endanger the person or another.
 Class C
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (a-1) For this section, Alcoholic Beverage Code 
licensed premises are public places
 (b) defense that the alcohol/other substance was for 
therapeutic purposes and part of professional 
medical treatment by a licensed physician.
 (d) PI is NOT a lesser included offense under PC 
49.04: DWI
 (e) This offense, when committed by one under 21, 
is punished the same as ABC 106.071 (18-20 with 2 
prior convictions)
 • Class B with community service and classes 
• DL suspension term
 Public Intoxication: CCP 14.031
 
 Officers who believe it’s 
unnecessary
 others
 may then 
release the PI 
for 
protection of the person or 
ADULT
 (not a child) to:
 
 an 
ADULT
 who agrees to 
assume responsibility
 
 An approved dependency program AND the person 
or
 is VOLUNTARILY admitted
 
 Verbally/voluntary consents to a sobering supervision facility & is admitted
 
 Officer/agency may not be held liable for damages resulting from this release
 Public Intoxication: CCP 14.031
 
 Magistrates may release the person under the same considerations
 36
 
 Prior releases 
may not be considered
 for 
future arrests/releases
 37
 Sec. 49.11. PROOF OF MENTAL STATE UNNECESSARY.  
(a) Notwithstanding Section 6.02(b), proof of a culpable mental state is not required for 
conviction of an offense under this chapter. 
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to an offense under Section 49.031. 
Sec. 49.02. PUBLIC INTOXICATION. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person appears in a public place while intoxicated to the 
degree that the person may endanger the person or another. 
(a-1) For the purposes of this section, a premises licensed or permitted under the Alcoholic 
Beverage Code is a public place. 
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the alcohol or other substance was 
administered for therapeutic purposes and as a part of the person's professional medical 
treatment by a licensed physician. 
(c) Except as provided by Subsection (e), an offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(d) An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense under Section 49.04. 
(e) An offense under this section committed by a person younger than 21 years of age is 
punishable in the same manner as if the minor committed an offense to which Section 106.071, 
Alcoholic Beverage Code, applies. 
10.4. Identify the necessary conditions for arrest. 
14.031. PUBLIC INTOXICATION. (a) In lieu of arresting an individual who is not a child, as defined 
by Section 51.02, Family Code, and who commits an offense under Section 49.02, Penal Code, a 
peace officer may release the individual if: 
(1) the officer believes detention in a penal facility is unnecessary for the protection of the 
individual or others; and 
(2) the individual: 
(A) is released to the care of an adult who agrees to assume responsibility for the individual; 
(B) verbally consents to voluntary treatment for substance use in a program in a treatment 
facility licensed and approved by the Health and Human Services Commission, and the program 
admits the individual for treatment; or 
(C) verbally consents to voluntary admission to a facility that provides a place for individuals to 
become sober under supervision, and the facility admits the individual for supervision. 
(b) A magistrate may release from custody an individual who is not a child, as defined by Section 
51.02, Family Code, and who is arrested under Section 49.02, Penal Code, if the magistrate 
determines the individual meets the conditions required for release in lieu of arrest under 
Subsection (a) of this article. 
(c) The release of an individual under Subsection (a) or (b) of this article to a substance use 
treatment program or a facility that provides a place for individuals to become sober under 
supervision may not be considered by a peace officer or magistrate in determining whether the 
individual should be released to such a program or facility for a subsequent incident or arrest 
under Section 49.02, Penal Code. 
(d) A peace officer and the agency or political subdivision that employs the peace officer may 
not be held liable for damage to persons or property that results from the actions of an 
individual released under Subsection (a) or (b) of this article. 
• Notice the 1st element that must be met (protection of the person or others) before 
considering release options. 
• If that belief is negligent and someone gets hurt, then the liability exemption in this statute 
may not hold up 
Must take offender before Magistrate:  CCP 14.06
 
 citation
 Officers charging a Class C, except Public Intoxication: may, instead of arresting, 
issue a 
, containing:
 
 notice of the time & place a person must appear before a magistrate;
 
 the name and address of the person charged;
 
 the offense charged;
 
 Info on full payment alternatives, if convicted & is unable to pay; and
 
 the FV admonishment, in boldfaced, underlined type, or capital letters
 CCP 14.06: The Family Violence Admonishment
 38
 "If you are convicted of a misdemeanor offense involving violence 
where you are or were a spouse, intimate partner, parent, or guardian 
of the victim or are or were involved in another, similar relationship 
with the victim, it may be unlawful for you to possess or purchase a 
firearm, including a handgun or long gun, or ammunition, pursuant to 
federal law under 18 U.S.C. Section 922(g)(9) or Section 46.04(b), 
Texas Penal Code.  If you have any questions whether these laws make 
it illegal for you to possess or purchase a firearm, you should consult an 
attorney."
 How Does the Notice to Appear Work?
 
 543.003. NOTICE TO APPEAR: NOT TAKEN BEFORE MAGISTRATE. 

 39
 Officers who arrest for a transportation violation AND do not take the person before a magistrate 
(
 Stop becomes an arrest when the citation is presented to the violator
 )
 
 Shall issue a written notice to appear
 
 TC 543.004: Officers shall issue written notices to appear for
 
 :
 Speeding, using a wireless communication device, or open container 
AND
 
 The violator complies by making the written PTA (WPTA) 

 If an out of state resident or vehicle, then this only applies if required under 703: 
NONRESIDENT VIOLATOR COMPACT OF 1977
 1
 14.06. MUST TAKE OFFENDER BEFORE MAGISTRATE.  
(b) A peace officer who is charging a person, including a child, with committing an offense that is 
a Class C misdemeanor, other than an offense under Section 49.02, Penal Code, may, instead of 
taking the person before a magistrate, issue a citation to the person that contains: 
(1) written notice of the time and place the person must appear before a magistrate; 
(2) the name and address of the person charged; 
(3) the offense charged; 
(4) information regarding the alternatives to the full payment of any fine or costs assessed 
against the person, if the person is convicted of the offense and is unable to pay that amount; 
and 
(5) the following admonishment, in boldfaced or underlined type or in capital letters: 
"If you are convicted of a misdemeanor offense involving violence where you are or were a 
spouse, intimate partner, parent, or guardian of the victim or are or were involved in another, 
similar relationship with the victim, it may be unlawful for you to possess or purchase a firearm, 
including a handgun or long gun, or ammunition, pursuant to federal law under 18 U.S.C. 
Section 922(g)(9) or Section 46.04(b), Texas Penal Code. If you have any questions whether 
these laws make it illegal for you to possess or purchase a firearm, you should consult an 
attorney." 
543.003. NOTICE TO APPEAR REQUIRED: PERSON NOT TAKEN BEFORE MAGISTRATE. An officer 
who arrests a person for a violation of this subtitle punishable as a misdemeanor and who does 
not take the person before a magistrate shall issue a written notice to appear in court showing 
the time and place the person is to appear, the offense charged, the name and address of the 
person charged, and, if applicable, the license number of the person's vehicle. 
543.004. NOTICE TO APPEAR REQUIRED: CERTAIN OFFENSES. (a) An officer shall issue a written 
notice to appear if: 
(1) the offense charged is: (A) speeding; (B) the use of a wireless communication device under 
Section 545.4251; or (C) a violation of the open container law, Section 49.031, Penal Code; and 
(2) the person makes a written promise to appear in court as provided by Section 543.005. 
(b) If the person is a resident of or is operating a vehicle licensed in a state or country other than 
this state, Subsection (a) applies only as provided by Chapter 703. 
(c) The offenses specified by Subsection (a) are the only offenses for which issuance of a written 
notice to appear is mandatory. 
What is the Law on a Refusal to Sign a Citation?
 
 TC 543.005: To secure release, the person arrested MUST
 :
 
 Make the WPTA by signing the written notice prepared by the officer
 
 Officer shall retain the original and deliver a copy to the person arrested.  

 The officer shall then promptly release the person from custody.
 
 TC 543.008: Violation by officers of a provision of 543.003
 543.007 is 
misconduct & officers are subject to removal from their position.
2
 Must take offender before Magistrate:  CCP 14.06
 
 If a person 
resides in the county of the offense
 , officers may issue a 
citation
 
 for some Class A or B misdemeanors:
 Possession of marijuana
 
 Possession of a Controlled Substance Weight for Penalty Group 2
 
 Criminal Mischief and Graffiti
 
 Theft and Theft of Service 

 Driving While License Invalid
 
A
 If the local county DA’s office approves & accepts this procedure
 3
 49.031. POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN 
MOTOR VEHICLE
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Defenses, Punishments, & 
Enhancements
 (b) knowingly possesses an open container in a passenger area of a motor vehicle that is located on a 
public highway, regardless of it being operated, stopped, or parked.
 Possession of one or more in a single criminal episode is a single offense.
 (1) "Open container" = bottle, can, or other that contains any amount of alcoholic beverage and 
is/has been opened, has a broken seal, or contents are partially removed.
 d) Class C
 (2) "Passenger area of a motor vehicle"  area of a MV designed for the seating of the operator and 
passengers. It does not include:
 (A) a glove compartment or similar container that is locked;
 (B) the trunk of a vehicle; or
 (C) area behind the last upright seat; if the vehicle does not have a trunk.
 (3) "Public highway" = entire width between and adjacent to the boundary lines of any public road, 
street, highway, interstate, or other publicly maintained way if open for public motor vehicle travel 
and includes the right-of-way of a public highway.
 543.005. PROMISE TO APPEAR; RELEASE. To secure release, the person arrested must make a 
written promise to appear in court by signing the written notice prepared by the arresting 
officer. The signature may be obtained on a duplicate form or on an electronic device capable of 
creating a copy of the signed notice. The arresting officer shall retain the paper or electronic 
original of the notice and deliver the copy of the notice to the person arrested. The officer shall 
then promptly release the person from custody. 
543.008. VIOLATION BY OFFICER. A violation by an officer of a provision of Sections 543.003
543.007 is misconduct in office and the officer is subject to removal from the officer's position. 
A local county DA’s office has the option to use the procedure below 
(c) If the person resides in the county where the offense occurred, a peace officer who is 
charging a person with committing an offense that is a Class A or B misdemeanor may, instead 
of taking the person before a magistrate, issue a citation to the person that contains written 
notice of the time and place the person must appear before a magistrate of this state as 
described by Subsection (a), the name and address of the person charged, and the offense 
charged. 
(d) Subsection (c) applies only to a person charged with committing an offense under: 
(1) Section 481.121, Health and Safety Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (b)(1) 
or (2) of that section; 
(1-a) Section 481.1161, Health and Safety Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection 
(b)(1) or (2) of that section; 
(2) Section 28.03, Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (b)(2) of that 
section; 
(3) Section 28.08, Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (b)(2) or (3) of that 
section; 
(4) Section 31.03, Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (e)(2)(A) of that 
section; 
(5) Section 31.04, Penal Code, if the offense is punishable under Subsection (e)(2) of that 
section; 
(5-a) Section 37.10, Penal Code, if the offense is for tampering with a temporary tag issued 
under Chapter 502 or 503, Transportation Code; 
(6) Section 38.114, Penal Code, if the offense is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor; or 
(7) Section 521.457, Transportation Code. 
49.031. POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN MOTOR VEHICLE. (a) In this section: 
(1) "Open container" means a bottle, can, or other receptacle that contains any amount of 
alcoholic beverage and that is open, that has been opened, that has a broken seal, or the 
contents of which are partially removed. 
(2) "Passenger area of a motor vehicle" means the area of a motor vehicle designed for the 
seating of the operator and passengers of the vehicle. The term does not include: (A) a glove 
compartment or similar storage container that is locked; (B) the trunk of a vehicle; or (C) the 
area behind the last upright seat of the vehicle, if the vehicle does not have a trunk. 
(3) "Public highway" means the entire width between and immediately adjacent to the 
boundary lines of any public road, street, highway, interstate, or other publicly maintained way 
if any part is open for public use for the purpose of motor vehicle travel. The term includes the 
right-of-way of a public highway. 
(d) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor. 
49.031. POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN 
MOTOR VEHICLE
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (b) knowingly possesses an open container in a passenger area of a 
motor vehicle that is located on a public highway, regardless of 
whether the vehicle is being operated or is stopped or parked. 
Possession by a person of one or more open containers in a single 
criminal episode is a single offense.
 Class C
 (e) Peace officer shall issue the written notice to appear, 
and if the person complies, (s)he shall be released 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) exception if a passenger in:
 (1) the passenger area of a bus, taxicab, or 
limousine; or
 (2) the living quarters of a motorized 
house coach or motorized house trailer, 
including a self-contained camper, a 
motor home, or a recreational vehicle.
 49.04. DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) is intoxicated while operating a motor vehicle in a public place.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Class B w/minimum confinement of 72 
hrs
 Class B w/open container = min con of 6 
days
 Class A if BAC is >.15
 49.045. DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED WITH CHILD 
PASSENGER
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a)(1)person is intoxicated while operating a motor vehicle in a 
public place; and
 (2) the vehicle being operated by the person is occupied by a 
passenger who is younger than 15 years of age.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 SJF
 Arresting without a Warrant: CCP Chapter 14
 8
 (c) It is an exception to the application of Subsection (b) that at the time of the offense the 
defendant was a passenger in: 
(1) the passenger area of a motor vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the 
transportation of persons for compensation, including a bus, taxicab, or limousine; or 
(2) the living quarters of a motorized house coach or motorized house trailer, including a self
contained camper, a motor home, or a recreational vehicle. 
(e) A peace officer charging a person with an offense under this section, instead of taking the 
person before a magistrate, shall issue to the person a written citation and notice to appear that 
contains the time and place the person must appear before a magistrate, the name and address 
of the person charged, and the offense charged. If the person makes a written promise to 
appear before the magistrate by signing in duplicate the citation and notice to appear issued by 
the officer, the officer shall release the person. 
49.04. DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED.  
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while operating a motor vehicle in a 
public place. 
(b) Except as provided by Subsections (c) and (d) and Section 49.09, an offense under this 
section is a Class B misdemeanor, with a minimum term of confinement of 72 hours. 
(c) If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that at the time of the offense the 
person operating the motor vehicle had an open container of alcohol in the person's immediate 
possession, the offense is a Class B misdemeanor, with a minimum term of confinement of six 
days. 
(d) If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that an analysis of a specimen of 
the person's blood, breath, or urine showed an alcohol concentration level of 0.15 or more at 
the time the analysis was performed, the offense is a Class A misdemeanor. 
Sec. 49.045. DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED WITH CHILD PASSENGER.  
(a) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) the person is intoxicated while operating a motor vehicle in a public place; and 
(2) the vehicle being operated by the person is occupied by a passenger who is younger than 15 
years of age. 
(b) An offense under this section is a state jail felony. 
10.4. Identify the necessary conditions for arrest. 
The 11 Police Warrantless Arrest Powers for  
On-duty when there is PC of:
 1. PC of felonywith escape risk
 2.Out of state fugitive, charged with death penalty/1 year prison crime
 3.Offense within view/presence
 4. Felony/Peace Breach in view of Magistrate & their verbalorder
 5. Suspicious place/circumstance, with Felony/Peace Breach, AND a 
reasonable arrest urgency
 9
 
The Next Police Warrantless Arrest Power when there is PC of: 
 PC of felony with escape risk 
 Out of state fugitive, charged with death penalty/1 year prison crime 
 Offense within view/presence 
 Felony/Peace Breach in view of Magistrate & their verbal order 
 Suspicious place/circumstance, with Felony/Peace Breach, AND a reasonable arrest urgency 
 
 
10
 CCP 14.03: Officer MAY Arrest w/o Warrant
  Persons in suspicious places/circumstances which reasonably show guilt of some:
  Felony, Breach of the peace, PC CH. 42: DISORDERLY CONDUCT & RELATED OFFENSES, or
  PC 49.02: Public Intoxication
  Or threaten or about to commit some offense
 
CCP 14.03: Suspicious Persons in Suspicious Places 
 
 
 
11
 CCP 14.03: Officer MAY Arrest w/o Warrant
  DYAR v. STATE: Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, April 23, 2003: When 
police have probable cause to believe that person “X” has committed a felony or 
breach of the peace and is found in “Y” location under “suspicious circumstances” 
and there is no time to obtain a warrant because:  
1) the person will not otherwise remain at “Y” location;  
2) the evidence of the crime will otherwise disappear;  or 
3) the person poses a continuing, present threat to others, 
THEN Police may arrest “X” without a warrant.
 Without exigent circumstances 14.03 does not allow for the warrantless arrest
 
DYAR v. STATE: Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, April 23, 2003:  
• When police have probable cause to believe that person “X” has committed a felony or 
breach of the peace and is found in “Y” location under “suspicious circumstances” and there 
is no time to obtain a warrant because:   the person will not otherwise remain at “Y” 
location;   the evidence of the crime will otherwise disappear;  r  
• the person poses a continuing, present threat to others,  
THEN Police may arrest “X” without a warrant. 
• You must be able to articulate the need to take immediate enforcement action 
• DWI collision investigations are a common application of this arrest power 
 
 
The 11 Police Warrantless Arrest Powers for  
On-duty when there is PC of:
 1. PC of felonywith escape risk
 2.Out of state fugitive, charged with 
death penalty/1 year prison crime
 3.Offense within view/presence
 4. Felony/Peace Breach in view of 
Magistrate & their verbalorder
 5. Suspicious place/circumstance, 
with Felony/Peace Breach, AND a 
reasonable arrest urgency
 6. Felony admission with other PC
 7. Prevent consequences of Theft
 8.NON-Family violence assault & PC of 
further BI to the victim
 9. Any family violence offense
 10.Emergency Call Interference
 11.Protective Orders with PC: shall
 arrest if in your presence
 12
 
The 11 Police Warrantless Arrest Powers for On-duty when there is PC of: 
 PC of felony with escape risk 
 Out of state fugitive, charged with death penalty/1 year prison crime 
 Offense within view/presence 
 Felony/Peace Breach in view of Magistrate & their verbal order 
 Suspicious place/circumstance, with Felony/Peace Breach, AND a reasonable arrest urgency 
 Felony admission with other PC 
 Prevent consequences of Theft 
 Suspicious place/circumstance, with Felony/Peace Breach, AND a reasonable arrest urgency 
 NON-Family violence assault & PC of further BI to the victim 
 Any family violence offense 
 Emergency Call Interference 
 Protective Orders with PC: shall arrest if in your presence 
 
 
49.05. FLYING WHILE INTOXICATED
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while 
operating an aircraft.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Class B w/min confinement 72hrs
 49.06. BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while 
operating a watercraft.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Class B w/minimum confinement of 72 
hrs
 49.061. BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED WITH CHILD 
PASSENGER
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (1) is intoxicated while operating a watercraft; and
 (2) the watercraft being operated by the person is occupied by a 
passenger who is younger than 15 years of age. 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 SJF
 49.065. ASSEMBLING OR OPERATING AN 
AMUSEMENT RIDE WHILE INTOXICATED
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while 
operating an amusement ride or while assembling a mobile 
amusement ride.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Class B w/minimum confinement of 72 
hrs
 Class B w/open container 6 days
 8.33. Define intoxication, list, and apply the elements of offenses involving intoxication.  
49.05. FLYING WHILE INTOXICATED. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while operating an aircraft. 
(b) Except as provided by Section 49.09, an offense under this section is a Class B misdemeanor, 
with a minimum term of confinement of 72 hours. 
49.06. BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED. 
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while operating a watercraft. 
(b) Except as provided by Section 49.09, an offense under this section is a Class B misdemeanor, 
with a minimum term of confinement of 72 hours. 
49.061. BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED WITH CHILD PASSENGER.  
(a) A person commits an offense if: 
(1) the person is intoxicated while operating a watercraft; and 
(2) the watercraft being operated by the person is occupied by a passenger who is younger than 
15 years of age.  
(b) An offense under this section is a state jail felony.  
49.065. ASSEMBLING OR OPERATING AN AMUSEMENT RIDE WHILE INTOXICATED.  
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is intoxicated while operating an amusement ride 
or while assembling a mobile amusement ride. 
(b) Except as provided by Subsection (c) and Section 49.09, an offense under this section is a 
Class B misdemeanor with a minimum term of confinement of 72 hours. 
(c) If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that at the time of the offense the 
person operating the amusement ride or assembling the mobile amusement ride had an open 
container of alcohol in the person's immediate possession, the offense is a Class B misdemeanor 
with a minimum term of confinement of six days. 
49.07. INTOXICATION ASSAULT
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) by accident or mistake:
 (1) while operating an aircraft, watercraft, or amusement ride while 
intoxicated, or while operating a motor vehicle in a public place 
while intoxicated, by reason of that intoxication causes serious bodily 
injury to another; or
 (2) as a result of assembling a mobile amusement ride while 
intoxicated causes serious bodily injury to another.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 3°F
 49.08. INTOXICATION MANSLAUGHTER
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (1) operates a motor vehicle in a public place, operates an aircraft, a 
watercraft, or an amusement ride, or assembles a mobile amusement 
ride; and
 (2) is intoxicated and by reason of that intoxication causes the death 
of another by accident or mistake.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 2°F
 49.12.  APPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN CONDUCT
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Sections 49.07 and 49.08 do not apply to injury to or the death of an unborn child if the conduct charged is conduct 
committed by the mother of the unborn child.
 49.09. ENHANCED OFFENSES AND PENALTIES
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 1 Prior DWI/FWI/BWI or Assemble = Class A Misd.
 1 Prior Intox.MS = 3rd Degree Felony
 2 Prior DWI/FWI/BWI or Assemble = 3rd Degree Felony
 Intox Assault w/ SBI to Firefighter/EMS = 2nd Degree Felony
 Intox Assault w/ SBI to LEO/Judge = 1st Degree Felony
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 Intox Manslaughter to LEO/Firefighter, EMS = 1st Degree Felony
 Any second conviction within 5 years of 1st conviction, requires 
interlock on any vehicle owned or operated.
 49.07. INTOXICATION ASSAULT.  
(a) A person commits an offense if the person, by accident or mistake: 
(1) while operating an aircraft, watercraft, or amusement ride while intoxicated, or while 
operating a motor vehicle in a public place while intoxicated, by reason of that intoxication 
causes serious bodily injury to another; or 
(2) as a result of assembling a mobile amusement ride while intoxicated causes serious bodily 
injury to another. 
(b) In this section, "serious bodily injury" means injury that creates a substantial risk of death or 
that causes serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function 
of any bodily member or organ. 
(c) Except as provided by Section 49.09, an offense under this section is a felony of the third 
degree. 
49.08. INTOXICATION MANSLAUGHTER.  
(a) A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1) operates a motor vehicle in a public place, operates an aircraft, a watercraft, or an 
amusement ride, or assembles a mobile amusement ride; and 
(2) is intoxicated and by reason of that intoxication causes the death of another by accident or 
mistake. 
(b) Except as provided by Section 49.09, an offense under this section is a felony of the second 
degree. 
49.12.  APPLICABILITY TO CERTAIN CONDUCT.  Sections 49.07 and 49.08 do not apply to injury to 
or the death of an unborn child if the conduct charged is conduct committed by the mother of 
the unborn child. 
49.09. ENHANCED OFFENSES AND PENALTIES  
• 1 Prior DWI/FWI/BWI or Assemble  = Class A Misd. 
• 1 Prior Intox.MS = 3rd Degree Felony 
• 2 Prior DWI/FWI/BWI or Assemble = 3rd Degree Felony 
• Intox Assault w/ SBI to Firefighter/EMS = 2nd  Degree Felony 
• Intox Assault w/ SBI to LEO/Judge = 1st Degree Felony  
• Intox Manslaughter to LEO/Firefighter, EMS = 1st Degree Felony 
• Any second conviction within 5 years of 1st conviction, requires interlock on any vehicle 
owned or operated.  
49.10. NO DEFENSE
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 NO DEFENSE.  In a prosecution under Section 49.03, 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.065, 49.07, 
or 49.08, the fact that the defendant is or has been entitled to use the alcohol, controlled substance, 
drug, dangerous drug, or other substance is not a defense.
 20.05. SMUGGLING OF PERSONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Stackable
 (1) Knowingly uses a motor vehicle/aircraft/watercraft/other 
means to transport an individual with intent to:
 (A) conceal the individual from a peace officer or special 
investigator; or
 (B) flee from a person the actor knows is a peace officer or 
special investigator attempting to lawfully arrest or detain the 
actor;
 (2) encourages or induces a person to enter or remain in this 
country in violation of federal law by concealing, harboring, or 
shielding that person from detection; or
 (3) assists, guides, or directs 2+ individuals to enter or remain 
on agricultural land without the effective consent of the 
owner.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (c) affirmative defense, other than an offense 
punishable under (b)(1)(A) or (b)(2), that the actor 
is related to the smuggled individual within the 
second degree of consanguinity or, at the time of 
the offense, within the second degree of affinity.
 (b1&2)3°F except
 2°F if SBI likely,u18,for $,poss firearm, 
except
 1°F person is vic of sex assault or suffers 
sbi/death
 49.10. NO DEFENSE. In a prosecution under Section 49.031, 49.04, 49.045, 49.05, 49.06, 49.061, 
49.065, 49.07, or 49.08, the fact that the defendant is or has been entitled to use the alcohol, 
controlled substance, drug, dangerous drug, or other substance is not a defense. 
8.11. Define and apply offenses involving unlawful concealment and/or transportation of 
persons 
20.05. SMUGGLING OF PERSONS. (a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly: 
(1) uses a motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or other means of conveyance to transport an 
individual with the intent to: 
(A) conceal the individual from a peace officer or special investigator; or (B) flee from a person 
the actor knows is a peace officer or special investigator attempting to lawfully arrest or detain 
the actor; 
(2) encourages or induces a person to enter or remain in this country in violation of federal law 
by concealing, harboring, or shielding that person from detection; or (3) assists, guides, or 
directs two or more individuals to enter or remain on agricultural land without the effective 
consent of the owner. 
(b) Subject to Subsections (b-1) and (b-2), an offense under this section is a felony of the third 
degree with a term of imprisonment of 10 years, except that the offense is: 
(1) a felony of the second degree with a minimum term of imprisonment of 10 years if: 
(A) the actor commits the offense in a manner that creates a substantial likelihood that the 
smuggled individual will suffer serious bodily injury or death; (B) the smuggled individual is a 
child younger than 18 years of age at the time of the offense; (C) the offense was committed 
with the intent to obtain a pecuniary benefit; (D) during the commission of the offense the 
actor, another party to the offense, or an individual assisted, guided, or directed by the actor 
knowingly possessed a firearm; or (E) the actor commits the offense under Subsection (a)(1)(B); 
or 
(2) a felony of the first degree with a minimum term of imprisonment of 10 years if: 
(A) it is shown on the trial of the offense that, as a direct result of the commission of the 
offense, the smuggled individual became a victim of sexual assault, as defined by Section 
22.011, or aggravated sexual assault, as defined by Section 22.021; or (B) the smuggled 
individual suffered serious bodily injury or death. 
(b-1) If at the punishment stage of the trial or at the time of entering a plea agreement for an 
offense under this section punishable as a felony of the third degree, the attorney representing 
the state in the prosecution of the offense certifies to the court in writing that the actor has 
provided significant cooperation to the state or law enforcement, and describes the manner of 
cooperation, the minimum term of imprisonment is five years. The certification is confidential 
and shall be sealed by the court, except that the certification may be accessed by the office of 
the attorney representing the state, the attorney representing the defendant, and the court. For 
purposes of this subsection, "significant cooperation" includes: 
(1) testifying in a trial on behalf of the state against other parties to the offense;  (2) providing 
relevant information regarding the case and other parties to the offense;  (3) providing 
information that furthers the investigation of the charged offense and any other parties 
involved; or (4) providing information that aids law enforcement. 
(b-2) At the punishment stage of a trial of an offense under this section, other than an offense 
punishable under Subsection (b)(1)(A), (C), (D), or (E) or (b)(2), the actor may raise the issue as 
to whether the actor is related to the smuggled individual in the third degree of consanguinity 
or, at the time of the offense, in the third degree of affinity. If the actor proves the issue in the 
affirmative by a preponderance of the evidence, the offense is a felony of the third degree with 
a minimum term of imprisonment of five years. 
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under this section, other than an 
offense punishable under Subsection (b)(1)(A) or (b)(2), that the actor is related to the smuggled 
individual within the second degree of consanguinity or, at the time of the offense, within the 
second degree of affinity. 
(d) If conduct constituting an offense under this section also constitutes an offense under 
another section of this code, the actor may be prosecuted under either section or under both 
sections. 
20.06. CONTINUOUS SMUGGLING OF PERSONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) during a period that is 10 or more days in duration, the 
person engages 2+ times in conduct that constitutes an 
offense under Section 20.05.
 2°F except
 1°F if SBI or death likely or person is u18
 1°F 25-99 or life if person is vic of sex assault or suffers 
sbi/death
 Defense & Enhancements
 (b) Members of the jury are not required to agree 
unanimously on which specific conduct constituted 
a 20.05 offense or exact date the defendant 
engaged in that conduct. 
The jury must agree unanimously the defendant, 
during a period that is 10 or more days in duration, 
engaged 2+ times in conduct under Section 20.05.
 20.06. CONTINUOUS SMUGGLING OF PERSONS
 Defenses, Enhancements, & Trials
 (c) If the victim of a continuous offense is the same 
under a 20.05 offense, a defendant may not be convicted 
under 20.05 in the same criminal action for continuous, 
unless the 20.05 offense:
 (1) is charged in the alternative;
 (2) occurred outside the period for the continuous offense; or 
(3) is considered by the trier of fact to be a lesser included offense 
of the alleged continuous offense
 (d) A defendant may not be charged with more 
than one count of continuous if all the offense 
conduct under 20.05 is alleged to have been 
committed against the same victim.
 20.06. CONTINUOUS SMUGGLING OF PERSONS. (a) A person commits an offense if, during a 
period that is 10 or more days in duration, the person engages two or more times in conduct 
that constitutes an offense under Section 20.05. 
(b) If a jury is the trier of fact, members of the jury are not required to agree unanimously on 
which specific conduct engaged in by the defendant constituted an offense under Section 20.05 
or on which exact date the defendant engaged in that conduct. The jury must agree 
unanimously that the defendant, during a period that is 10 or more days in duration, engaged 
two or more times in conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20.05. 
(e) Except as provided by Subsections (f) and (g), an offense under this section is a felony of the 
second degree with a minimum term of imprisonment of 10 years. 
(f) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree with a minimum term of 
imprisonment of 10 years if: 
(1) the conduct constituting an offense under Section 20.05 is conducted in a manner that 
creates a substantial likelihood that the smuggled individual will suffer serious bodily injury or 
death; or (2) the smuggled individual is a child younger than 18 years of age at the time of the 
offense. 
(g) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree, punishable by imprisonment in 
the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for life or for any term of not more than 99 years or 
less than 25 years, if: 
(1) it is shown on the trial of the offense that, as a direct result of the commission of the 
offense, the smuggled individual became a victim of sexual assault, as defined by Section 
22.011, or aggravated sexual assault, as defined by Section 22.021; or (2) the smuggled 
individual suffered serious bodily injury or death. 
(c) If the victim of an offense under Subsection (a) is the same victim as a victim of an offense 
under Section 20.05, a defendant may not be convicted of the offense under Section 20.05 in 
the same criminal action as the offense under Subsection (a), unless the offense under Section 
20.05: 
(1) is charged in the alternative; or (2) occurred outside the period in which the offense alleged 
under Subsection (a) was committed; or 
(3) is considered by the trier of fact to be a lesser included offense of the offense alleged under 
Subsection (a). 
(d) A defendant may not be charged with more than one count under Subsection (a) if all of the 
conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20.05 is alleged to have been committed 
against the same victim. 
20A.02. TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 Stackable
 (a) knowingly, 
(1) traffics another person with the intent that the trafficked person 
engage in forced labor or services;
 "Traffic" means to transport, entice, recruit, harbor, provide, or 
otherwise obtain another person by any means.
 (2) receives a benefit from participating in a venture that involves an 
activity under (1), including by receiving labor or services the person 
knows are forced labor or services;
 (3) traffics another & by force/fraud/coercion, causes one to engage 
in: 43.02-3 (Prostitution/Promotion of); 43.04 (Aggravated Promo); 
43.05 (Compelling); 43.031/041 (Online/Aggravated Online Promo)
 (4) receives a benefit from participating in a venture with (3) activity 
or engages in sexual conduct with one trafficked by (3) activity.
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 b) 2°F except
 1°F if  SBI/Death includes unborn child, 
actor used or exhibited deadly weapon, 
strangulation or recruited, enticed, or
 obtained the trafficked person from a 
shelter or facility operating as a residential 
treatment center that serves runaway 
youth, foster children, the homeless, or 
persons subjected to human trafficking, 
domestic violence, or sexual assault
 20A.02. TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (5) traffics a child/disabled with the intent that the trafficked 
child or disabled individual engage in forced labor or services;
 (6) receives a benefit from participating in a (5) venue activity, 
includes receiving labor/services known to be forced;
 (7) traffics a child/disabled & causes one to engage in/be 
victim of 21.02 (Cont Sex Abuse); 21.11 (Indency with); 22.011 
/.021 (Sex/Agg Sex Assault); 43.02-3 (Prost/Promo of); 43.021 
(Solicit Prost); 43.031/.041 (Online/Agg Prost Promo); 43.05 
(Compelling Prost); 43.25 (Sex Performance); 43.251 
(Employment Harmful) or 43.26 (Poss/Promo Child Porn); 
Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 b) 1°F for (a)(5-8)
 (d) If the victim under (a)(7)(A) is the same for a 
21.02 offense, a defendant may not be convicted 
under 21.02 in the same criminal action for 7(A) 
trafficking unless the 21.02 offense: 
(8) receives a benefit from participating in a venture of (7)  
activity or engages in sexual conduct with a child/disabled 
trafficked a (7) venture
 (1) is charged in the alternative; or
 (2) occurred outside the alleged trafficking period; 
or (3) is considered by the trier of fact to be a lesser 
included offense of the alleged trafficking offense
 Sec. 20A.02. TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS. (a) A person commits an offense if the person 
knowingly: 
(1) traffics another person with the intent that the trafficked person engage in forced labor or 
services;  
(2) receives a benefit from participating in a venture that involves an activity described by (1), 
including by receiving labor or services the person knows are forced labor or services; 
(3) traffics another person and, through force, fraud, or coercion, causes the trafficked person to 
engage in conduct prohibited by: 
(A) Section 43.02 (Prostitution); (B) Section 43.03 (Promotion of Prostitution); (B-1) Section 
43.031 (Online Promotion of Prostitution); 
(C) Section 43.04 (Aggravated Promotion of Prostitution); (C-1) Section 43.041 (Aggravated 
Online Promotion of Prostitution); or (D) Section 43.05 (Compelling Prostitution); 
(4) receives a benefit from participating in a venture that involves an activity described by 
Subdivision (3) or engages in sexual conduct with a person trafficked in the manner described in 
Subdivision (3); 
"Traffic" means to transport, entice, recruit, harbor, provide, or otherwise obtain another 
person by any means. 
(b) Except for (b-1), an offense is a felony of the second degree. An offense under this section is 
a felony of the first degree if: 
(2) the commission of the offense results in serious bodily injury to or the death of the person 
who is trafficked;  
(3) the commission of the offense results in the death of an unborn child of the person who is 
trafficked; or  
(4) the actor: (A) used or exhibited a deadly weapon during the commission of the offense; (B) 
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly impeded the normal breathing or circulation of the blood 
of the trafficked person by applying pressure to the person's throat or neck or by blocking the 
person's nose or mouth; or (C) recruited, enticed, or obtained the trafficked person from a 
shelter or facility operating as a residential treatment center that serves runaway youth, foster 
children, the homeless, or persons subjected to human trafficking, domestic violence, or sexual 
assault. 
(5) traffics a child or disabled individual with the intent that the trafficked child or disabled 
individual engage in forced labor or services; 
(6) receives a benefit from participating in a venture that involves an activity described by 
Subdivision (5), including by receiving labor or services the person knows are forced labor or 
services; 
(7) traffics a child or disabled individual and by any means causes the trafficked child or disabled 
individual to engage in, or become the victim of, conduct prohibited by: (A) Section 21.02 
(Continuous Sexual Abuse of Young Child or Disabled Individual); (B) Section 21.11 (Indecency 
with a Child); (C) Section 22.011 (Sexual Assault); (D) Section 22.021 (Aggravated Sexual 
Assault); (E) Section 43.02 (Prostitution); (E-1) Section 43.021 (Solicitation of Prostitution); (F) 
Section 43.03 (Promotion of Prostitution); (F-1) Section 43.031 (Online Promotion of 
Prostitution); (G) Section 43.04 (Aggravated Promotion of Prostitution); (G-1) Section 43.041 
(Aggravated Online Promotion of Prostitution); (H) Section 43.05 (Compelling Prostitution); (I) 
Section 43.25 (Sexual Performance by a Child); (J) Section 43.251 (Employment Harmful to 
Children); or (K) Section 43.26 (Possession or Promotion of Child Pornography); or 
(8) receives a benefit from participating in a venture that involves an activity described by 
Subdivision (7) or engages in sexual conduct with a child or disabled individual trafficked in the 
manner described in Subdivision (7). 
(b) Except for (b-1), an offense under this section is a felony of the first degree if: (1) the 
applicable conduct constitutes an offense under Subsection (a)(5), (6), (7), or (8), regardless of 
whether the actor knows the age of the child or whether the actor knows the victim is disabled 
at the time of the offense;  
(d) If the victim of an offense under Subsection (a)(7)(A) is the same victim as a victim of an 
offense under Section 21.02, a defendant may not be convicted of the offense under Section 
21.02 in the same criminal action as the offense under Subsection (a)(7)(A) unless the offense 
under Section 21.02: (1) is charged in the alternative; (2) occurred outside the period in which 
the offense alleged under Subsection (a)(7)(A) was committed; or (3) is considered by the trier 
of fact to be a lesser included offense of the offense alleged under Subsection (a)(7)(A) 
20A.02. TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS
 Penalty enhancement
 1°F 25-99 or life if actor committed the offense on the premise or within 1,000 feet of:
 a school; juvenile detention facility; post-adjudication secure correctional facility; shelter or facility 
operating as a residential treatment center that serves runaway youth, foster children, homeless, or 
persons subjected to human trafficking, domestic violence, or sexual assault; a community center 
offering youth services and programs; or a child-care facility,  or 
an official school function taking place; or an event sponsored or sanctioned by the University 
Interscholastic League taking place.
 20A.03. CONTINUOUS TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS
 Conduct: Offense if a person:
 (a) during a period that is 30 or more days in duration, the 
person engages two or more times in conduct that constitutes 
an offense under Section 20A.02 against one or more victims.
 e) 1°F with punishment from 25 years to life/99 
years
 Defense Arguments & 
Enhancements
 (b) If a jury is the trier of fact, they are not required 
to agree unanimously on what conduct by the 
defendant constituted a 20A.02 offense or the exact 
date they engaged in that conduct. 
The jury must agree unanimously that the 
defendant, during a period that is 30 or more days 
in duration, engaged in conduct that constituted a 
20A.02 offense
 (c) If conduct constituting an offense under this section also constitutes an offense under 
another section of this code, the actor may be prosecuted under either section or under both 
sections. 
(b-1) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree punishable by imprisonment in 
the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for life or for a term of not more than 99 years or less 
than 25 years if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the actor committed the offense in a 
location that was:  
(1) on the premises of or within 1,000 feet of the premises of: (A) a school; (B) a juvenile 
detention facility; (C) a post-adjudication secure correctional facility; (D) a shelter or facility 
operating as a residential treatment center that serves runaway youth, foster children, people 
who are homeless, or persons subjected to human trafficking, domestic violence, or sexual 
assault; (E) a community center offering youth services and programs; or (F) a child-care facility, 
as defined by Section 42.002, Human Resources Code; or 
(2) on premises or within 1,000 feet of premises where: (A) an official school function was 
taking place; or (B) an event sponsored or sanctioned by the University Interscholastic League 
was taking place. 
20A.03. CONTINUOUS TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS. 
(a) A person commits an offense if, during a period that is 30 or more days in duration, the 
person engages two or more times in conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02 
against one or more victims. 
(b) If a jury is the trier of fact, members of the jury are not required to agree unanimously on 
which specific conduct engaged in by the defendant constituted an offense under Section 
20A.02 or on which exact date the defendant engaged in that conduct. The jury must agree 
unanimously that the defendant, during a period that is 30 or more days in duration, engaged in 
conduct that constituted an offense under Section 20A.02. 
(e) An offense under this section is a felony of the first degree, punishable by imprisonment in 
the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for life or for any term of not more than 99 years or 
less than 25 years. 
20A.03. CONTINUOUS TRAFFICKING OF PERSONS
 Trials and charges
 (c) If the victim here is the same for 20A.02 case, a defendant may not be convicted for 20A.02 in 
the same criminal action of the continuous case unless the 20A.02 offense:
 (1) is charged in the alternative;
 (2) occurred outside the alleged continuous period; or 
(3) is considered to be a lesser included offense for the continuous case.
 (d) Defendant may not be charged with more than one continuous count if all conduct in the 
20A.02 case is against the same victim.
 In the following scenarios, the student will:
 • ID the offense and if it’s a Class C/Arrestable Misdemeanor/Felony.
 • Is there sufficient probable cause and can/should a warrantless arrest be made?  
• Discuss any special handling of suspect(s) and potential evidence recovery
 • Answer any additional questions noted for the scenario.
 Scenario #1:
 Scenario #1: While on patrol, the student/officer observes the suspect 
walking along the side of the roadway with the appearance of being lost. 
The student/officer stops to assist the suspect and upon approach, the 
student/officer discovers the suspect to be highly intoxicated and 
disoriented.  The confirms the subject’s intoxication through standard 
sobriety tests.
 49.02 Public Intoxication
 Scenario #2: 
The student/officer observes a vehicle traveling over the posted speed 
limit and conducts a stop on the vehicle. Upon approach, the 
student/officer observes an open/uncapped liquor bottle in the 
center console of the vehicle, but the driver is eventually cleared of 
driving while intoxicated after the student/officer conducts a field 
sobriety test on the subject.
 49.031 Possession of Alcoholic Beverage in Motor Vehicle 
(c) If the victim of an offense under Subsection (a) is the same victim as a victim of an offense 
under Section 20A.02, a defendant may not be convicted of the offense under Section 20A.02 in 
the same criminal action as the offense under Subsection (a), unless the offense under Section 
20A.02: 
(1) is charged in the alternative; 
(2) occurred outside the period in which the offense alleged under Subsection (a) was 
committed; or 
(3) is considered by the trier of fact to be a lesser included offense of the offense alleged under 
Subsection (a). 
(d) A defendant may not be charged with more than one count under Subsection (a) if all of the 
conduct that constitutes an offense under Section 20A.02 is alleged to have been committed 
against the same victim. 
In the following scenarios, the student will: 
• ID the offense and if it’s a Class C/Arrestable Misdemeanor/Felony. 
• Is there sufficient probable cause and can/should a warrantless arrest be made?   
• Discuss any special handling of suspect(s) and potential evidence recovery 
• Answer any additional questions noted for the scenario. 
Scenario #1: While on patrol, the student/officer observes the suspect walking along the side of 
the roadway with the appearance of being lost. The student/officer stops to assist the suspect 
and upon approach, the student/officer discovers the suspect to be highly intoxicated and 
disoriented. The confirms the subject’s intoxication through standard sobriety tests. 
Scenario 2: student/officer observes a vehicle traveling over the posted speed limit and 
conducts a stop on the vehicle. Upon approach, the student/officer observes an open/uncapped 
liquor bottle in the center console of the vehicle, but the driver is eventually cleared of driving 
while intoxicated after the student/officer conducts a field sobriety test on the subject. 
Scenario #3: 
The student/officer responds to a motor vehicle involving injuries. 
Upon arrival to the accident scene, the victim was struck by the 
suspect’s vehicle while legally crossing the street, suffering only minor 
abrasions. After the investigation, the suspect was determined to be too 
intoxicated to operate a motor vehicle.
 49.07 Intoxication Assault 
Scenario # 4: 
The student/officer conducts a traffic stop on a local highway for a defective tail lamp.  Upon 
approaching the vehicle, the student/officer hears screaming and knocking from inside of the 
trunk.  The officer removes the suspect driver and opens the trunk. The student/officer 
observes a female and two small children inside of the trunk.  The officer learns from the 
female that she is trying to enter the United States illegally and has paid the suspect $2,000 to 
bring her and her children into the country.  The driver says that he did not know they were in 
his truck.  He claims they must have hidden inside his truck when he stopped somewhere.  He 
gives consent to search the vehicle, and during the search, the student officer finds $2,000 
beneath the driver’s seat.
 Sec. 20.05. Smuggling of Persons
 Scenario 5: The Boozer Sooner
 Home from OU and after a breakup, college student, Willie Ralph, drives himself to the R-Bar 
to meet up with some friends and have some drinks.  After a long night of drinking, Willie 
exits the bar and is talking with his friends. Willie is slurring his speech, seems to be swaying 
quite a bit, and appears to be stumbling slightly while he walks. After talking with his friends, 
Willie walks to his car, gets inside, turns the key in the ignition, and backs out of the parking 
space. He manages to get on to Eagle Dr. and starts heading towards his house, when he gets a 
call from his 14-year-old niece, Nita Ralph, who needs a ride home.  Willie goes and picks up 
Nita.  As Willie comes up to the stop light at an intersection, he doesn’t notice the red light 
and continues through the intersection, causing a collision with a vehicle that was traveling 
through it, with the right of way. Nita suffers a minor cut to her face and willie has a large 
laceration to his face and a broken ankle. No one is injured in the other vehicle.
 Scenario #6
 The student/officer conducted a traffic stop for a stop sign violation.  
Upon making contact with the driver, the driver advised that he was 
running a quick errand and did not have any identification on his 
person. He further stated that his name was Joe Smith, D.O.B. 
06/06/1966. During the investigation, the student/officer was able to 
verify the driver’s identity as James Smith, D.O.B. 03/26/1970. Mr. 
Smith was found to have an outstanding warrant for a probation 
violation. 
Sec. 38.02. Failure to Identify 
3: The student/officer responds to a motor vehicle involving injuries. Upon arrival to the 
accident scene, the victim was struck by the suspect’s vehicle while legally crossing the street, 
suffering only minor abrasions. After the investigation, the suspect was determined to be too 
intoxicated to operate a motor vehicle. 
4: The student/officer conducts a traffic stop on a local highway for a defective tail lamp.  Upon 
approaching the vehicle, the student/officer hears screaming and knocking from inside of the 
trunk.  The officer removes the suspect driver and opens the trunk. The student/officer observes 
a female and two small children inside of the trunk.  The officer learns from the female that she 
is trying to enter the United States illegally and has paid the suspect $2,000 to bring her and her 
children into the country.  The driver says that he did not know they were in his truck.  He claims 
they must have hidden inside his truck when he stopped somewhere.  He gives consent to 
search the vehicle, and during the search, the student officer finds $2,000 beneath the driver’s 
seat. 
5: Home from OU and after a breakup, college student, Willie Ralph, drives himself to the R-Bar 
to meet up with some friends and have some drinks.  After a long night of drinking, Willie exits 
the bar and is talking with his friends. Willie is slurring his speech, seems to be swaying quite a 
bit, and appears to be stumbling slightly while he walks. After talking with his friends, Willie 
walks to his car, gets inside, turns the key in the ignition, and backs out of the parking space. He 
manages to get on to Eagle Dr. and starts heading towards his house, when he gets a call from 
his 14-year-old niece, Nita Ralph, who needs a ride home.  Willie goes and picks up Nita.  As 
Willie comes up to the stop light at an intersection, he doesn’t notice the red light and continues 
through the intersection, causing a collision with a vehicle that was traveling through it, with the 
right of way. Nita suffers a minor cut to her face and willie has a large laceration to his face and 
a broken ankle. No one is injured in the other vehicle.  
6: The student/officer conducted a traffic stop for a stop sign violation.  Upon making contact 
with the driver, the driver advised that he was running a quick errand and did not have any 
identification on his person. He further stated that his name was Joe Smith, D.O.B. 06/06/1966. 
During the investigation, the student/officer was able to verify the driver’s identity as James 
Smith, D.O.B. 03/26/1970. Mr. Smith was found to have an outstanding warrant for a probation 
violation.  
Scenario #7: The Oceanic Traffic Controller
 Diego and Samuel hear from Phil that Matt will sneak people into the country 
for a fee.  Phil, a satisfied customer of Matt’s says that just last week, he paid Matt 
to sneak some young girls by boat into the country from the Philippines for him.  
So, Diego and Samuel each pay Matt $5,000 to bring various family members, 
aged 14 to 34 into the US from Cuba. Throughout the next week, Matt decides 
to hide Diego and Samuel’s relatives into several boats with 6 girls (13-21) into 
one boat.  What do you have on Matt?
 Scenario #7, Part 2: The Oceanic Traffic Controller
 Typically, Matt charges Phil less money because he knows that Phil coerces the 
young girls into becoming actors in Phil’s online pornography business.  In 
exchange, Matt gets 10% of what the girls bring into Phil’s business. Now Matt, 
being the cunning entrepreneur, decides to send the 6 girls, from Diego and 
Samuel, to Phil for $2,000 and their current business arrangement.  Matt then 
tells Diego and Samuel that the police intercepted the boat with the girls, so 
they did not make it into the country.  What do you have on Matt and Phil?
 Scenario 8
 An officer stops a vehicle for a traffic violation, improper lane change. The officer approaches 
the vehicle and meets with the driver. The officer observes that a second individual is in the 
vehicle. As the officer meets with the driver, he observes him to be nervous and sweating. The 
temperature outside is in the low 40’s.  The suspect does respond to the officer’s dialogue.  He 
just stares straight ahead. 
The second subject is upset and feels that they are being harassed by law enforcement. The 
subject continues to stare ahead and does not give the officer any information.
 In addition to your questions for the scenario, describe how would you might further 
handle this situation, both the driver and passenger?
 Scenario 9
 You are dispatched to a disturbance in the parking lot of a bar in your district.  Caller says there is a 
drunk male trying to drive from the bar.  Upon arrival you contact a bar staff member who is standing 
with 2 other guys; one in a blue shirt and one in a white shirt.  The staff member says that the guy in the 
blue shirt was drunk and was asked to leave the bar.  The bar staff offered to call him a ride home, but 
he refused.  He also cussed them out and tried get into his car when he fell to the ground.  
While the staff member was helping him up, the guy in the white shirt walked up.  He said that he was a 
friend of the guy in the blue shirt and would give him a ride home.  When the guy in the white shirt 
tried to get the friend to go with him, he would not.  The guy in the blue shirt told them to leave him 
alone and that he was just fine to drive his damn self home.  They have been trying to convince him to 
not drive when you showed up.
 Upon contact the guy in the white shirt is trying to convince him to go with him.  The guy in the blue 
shirt keeps pushing him away and yells, “NO, I got this.”  It is obvious the guy in the blue shirt is very 
intoxicated.  The guy in the white shirt is sober and willing to be responsible for him if you can convince 
the guy to go with him.
 What should you do?
 40
 7: The student/officer conducted a traffic stop for a stop sign violation.  Upon making contact 
with the driver, the driver advised that he was running a quick errand and did not have any 
identification on his person. He further stated that his name was Joe Smith, D.O.B. 06/06/1966. 
During the investigation, the student/officer was able to verify the driver’s identity as James 
Smith, D.O.B. 03/26/1970. Mr. Smith was found to have an outstanding warrant for a probation 
violation.  
7 part 2: Typically, Matt charges Phil less money because he knows that Phil coerces the young 
girls into becoming actors in Phil’s online pornography business.  In exchange, Matt gets 10% of 
what the girls bring into Phil’s business. Now Matt, being the cunning entrepreneur, decides to 
send the 6 girls, from Diego and Samuel, to Phil for $2,000 and their current business 
arrangement.  Matt then tells Diego and Samuel that the police intercepted the boat with the 
girls, so they did not make it into the country.  What do you have on Matt and Phil? 
8: An officer stops a vehicle for a traffic violation, improper lane change. The officer approaches 
the vehicle and meets with the driver. The officer observes that a second individual is in the 
vehicle. As the officer meets with the driver, he observes him to be nervous and sweating. The 
temperature outside is in the low 40’s.  The suspect does respond to the officer’s dialogue.  He 
just stares straight ahead.  The second subject is upset and argues that they are being harassed 
by law enforcement. The subject continues to stare ahead and does not give the officer any 
information. 
In addition to your questions for the scenario, describe how would you further handle this 
situation, both the driver and passenger? 
Scenario 9 
• You are dispatched to a disturbance in the parking lot of a bar in your district.  Caller says 
there is a drunk male trying to drive from the bar.  Upon arrival you contact a bar staff 
member who is standing with 2 other guys; one in a blue shirt and one in a white shirt.  The 
staff member says that the guy in the blue shirt was drunk and was asked to leave the bar.  
The bar staff offered to call him a ride home, but he refused.  He also cussed them out and 
tried get into his car when he fell to the ground.   
• While the staff member was helping him up, the guy in the white shirt walked up.  He said 
that he was a friend of the guy in the blue shirt and would give him a ride home.  When the 
guy in the white shirt tried to get the friend to go with him, he would not.  The guy in the 
blue shirt told them to leave him alone and that he was just fine to drive his damn self home.  
They have been trying to convince him to not drive when you showed up.  
• Upon contact the guy in the white shirt is trying to convince him to go with him.  The guy in 
the blue shirt keeps pushing him away and yells, “NO, I got this.”  It is obvious the guy in the 
blue shirt is very intoxicated.  The guy in the white shirt is sober and willing to be responsible 
for him if you can convince the guy to go with him. 
• What should you do? 
Scenario 10
 Officers are at residence because of a reported disturbance.  While at the 
location, Officers see Tim Smith drive up in a car and park it in the driveway.  As 
Tim steps out of the car, Officers recognize him as Tim Smith, the owner of the 
residence.  They also know that he has a current outstanding warrant for driving 
without a license.  Officers arrest Tim for the outstanding warrant and search his 
car. Inside they find a handgun and a bag of meth in a jacket pocket, which was 
sitting in the backseat area.
 Are the officers’ actions legally justified? Explain your answer.
 41
 QUESTIONS
 Scenario 10 
• Officers are at residence because of a reported disturbance.  While at the location, Officers 
see Tim Smith drive up in a car and park it in the driveway.  As Tim steps out of the car, 
Officers recognize him as Tim Smith, the owner of the residence.  They also know that he has 
a current outstanding warrant for driving without a license.  Officers arrest Tim for the 
outstanding warrant and search his car. Inside they find a handgun and a bag of meth in a 
jacket pocket, which was sitting in the backseat area. 
• Are the officers’ actions legally justified? Explain your answer. 
Conclusion 
• Q/A Session? 
• Quiz/Review game? 
• Self Study 
